CBS News has launched the CBS News Associates Program as part of its continuing commitment to recruit and maintain the excellence of its editorial staff. This highly competitive program is designed to identify outstanding aspiring journalists who can bring fresh and diverse insight to the areas of news production and news coverage. This program is not designed for people who wish to be on-air. Candidates will be selected from a broad range of racial, ethnic, economic, age, and geographical backgrounds, as well as those with disabilities.

The CBS News Associates Program is a 15-month, fast-track opportunity specifically targeted to individuals who have a Bachelor’s degree and are interested in developing their news gathering and production skills. Associates will have the opportunity to rotate among some of the broadcasts including the “CBS Evening News,” “CBS This Morning,” “48 Hours,” “60 Minutes,” “CBS Sunday Morning,” Newspath and the National Desk.

Applicants will be interviewed and admitted on a rolling basis. A panel of CBS News staff will determine the final candidates.

To apply, please send your resume to associateprogram@cbsnews.com.

CBS News Development Program

CBS News sponsors a unique program to identify and support promising journalists of color

The program, which began in January 2005, is designed to develop a pool of highly qualified producers and correspondents from which CBS affiliates and stations, as well as CBS News, will be able to draw talent. The goal of this program is to increase diversity in our newsroom, locally and nationally.

CBS News will work with CBS affiliates and minority journalist organizations to gather recommendations and conduct screenings at minority journalist conventions to identify candidates for the program, each of whom should have a minimum of two to three years professional experience in a TV newsroom. Applications will consist of a resume, a tape and recommendations. A committee comprised of CBS News executives and executive producers, CBS NEWSPATH executives, and CBS News’ Director of Development will select and interview the finalists for the program.

Two journalists, one producer and one reporter, will be selected each year for the program. CBS News will hire the journalists to work for two years at participating CBS affiliates. The journalists will be placed in strong newsrooms with a commitment to mentoring and enthusiasm for the project. Each participating affiliate will be involved in approving the candidate for its own newsroom. At the end of two years, the goal is for the journalists to join the CBS News organization.

Interested individuals may contact Kim Godwin, Director of Development & Diversity at GodwinK@cbsnews.com Click on this application link to download the form and more information on who to send to. The annual deadline for submission is December 30.

DUE TO THE HIGH VOLUME OF APPLICANTS, WE CANNOT RESPOND TO APPLICATION-STATUS INQUIRIES. CANDIDATES WHO MEET THE QUALIFCATIONS WILL BE CONTACTED DIRECTLY.
