BOSTON - Former NFL star Aaron Hernandez’s fiancee testified in his double-murder trial Thursday that she learned to keep her mouth shut and “not to ask any questions” in certain situations.

Shayanna Jenkins-Hernandez testified against Hernandez under a grant of immunity from prosecutors. She and Hernandez have a 4-year-old daughter. She said she took Hernandez’s last name in 2015.

Hernandez, a former tight end for the New England Patriots, is accused of fatally shooting two men in July 2012 after an encounter at a Boston nightclub. He is also charged with witness intimidation in the shooting of Alexander Bradley, allegedly to silence him about the killings.

Jenkins-Hernandez repeatedly said she could not recall details about conversations with Hernandez after the 2012 killings and after Bradley’s shooting in 2013.

She said she didn’t ask Hernandez for details about Bradley’s shooting, even though Hernandez and Bradley were close friends.

“He was not my friend. ...Yes, it’s a sad situation (but) why should I press about something like that?” she said.

CBS Boston reports that she said she never pressed Hernandez on the incident because “I pick and choose my battles.”

“I played my role,” Jenkins-Hernandez testified. “I cleaned and did everything else. There was no reason for me to ask any questions.”

Jenkins-Hernandez also said she did not recall getting a call from Hernandez at 2:37 a.m. on July 16, 2012, minutes after prosecutors say Hernandez shot Daniel de Abreu and Safiro Furtado as they sat in a car at a stoplight in Boston. Prosecutors said phone records show a 17-second call from Hernandez to her at that time.

Hernandez has denied shooting the men. His lawyer told the jury during opening statements that Bradley shot the men over a drug deal.

Bradley testified he saw Hernandez shoot the men. He also said Hernandez shot him in the face months later after he made a remark about the Boston shootings.

Hernandez is already serving a life sentence after being convicted in the 2013 killing of a man who was dating the sister of Jenkins-Hernandez.
