This is an educational program designed for college students who are interested in pursuing a career in journalism, broadcasting or production. Each student is selected and assigned on a first-come, first-served basis.

Where can I intern?

New York or Washington D.C.

Do I get to choose my department?

No, placement is at the sole discretion of the Director.

What are the duties? Learn fundamental newsgathering skills, find, confirm and report news stories, log tapes, coordinate scripts, research stories, conduct preliminary interviews, assist during shoots, select footage, perform light clerical duties and assist staff members. Duties vary in each department.

Follow us on Twitter @CBSNewsInterns

What are the requirements? Current undergraduate (rising junior or above) and graduate students are eligible. Students majoring in journalism, broadcasting or communications are preferred; other majors will be considered. Participants must have good computer skills, excellent written and verbal communication abilities and knowledge of current events. A 3.0 GPA or above is recommended. Students must be able to meet the minimum time commitment -- full time during the summer; at least three full weekdays in fall/spring. Recent graduates are not eligible for this program. Applicants must be legally authorized to work in the United States. Verification of employment eligibility will be required at the time of hire. Visa sponsorship is not available for this position.

Is this a paid position? Yes, CBS News will compensate each student an hourly wage. CBS News does not require students to receive college credit. Students are solely responsible for coordinating and meeting the credit requirements of their college/university.

When is the deadline? Students are accepted on a first-come, first-served basis. The number of positions varies for each semester:

Fall | Semester deadline : June 30

Spring | Semester deadline: October 31

Summer | Semester deadline: February 28

How do I apply? Email all the following materials together: application (click to download/print), resume, transcript (can be unofficial), a 1-page essay about why you want the internship and a letter from your university confirming that you are a student working toward a degree at their accredited college and support your participation in a paid internship at CBS News.

Due to the high volume of applicants, the office cannot respond to application-status inquiries; complete application packets are reviewed and qualified students are contacted directly for a Skype or in-person interview, depending on applicant location.

What are the departments?



”48 Hours” (NY) A CBS News magazine that goes behind the headlines to investigate baffling crimes, heartless scams and compelling real-life dramas. ”60 Minutes” (NY & DC) A CBS News magazine with investigative reports and features focusing on people and events in the news and behind the headlines. Broadcast Marketing (NY) The unit that is a liason between broadcasts and affiliates. ”CBS This Morning” (NY & DC) One of three live national morning shows that reports on a variety of topics including general news, business, consumer affairs, entertainment, health and medical. ”CBS Evening News” (NY & DC)

A nightly broadcast that covers breaking news reports, features and interviews by CBS News correspondents covering events throughout the world. ”Face the Nation” (DC) A weekly broadcast hosted by John Dickerson that discusses current national affairs with the principal newsmaker(s) of the week. Investigative Unit (NY & DC) The unit that produces hard-hitting, in-depth stories about government waste, homeland security, terrorism, crime, health insurance, medical fraud, etc. National Desk (NY & DC) This is the center for domestic newsgathering for all CBS News broadcasts. News Marketing (NY)

The unit that produces on-air promotion for television, radio and print for all network news broadcasts. Newspath (NY & DC)

The newsgathering and distribution unit that gathers footage, edits and redistributes video to affiliates about national & international news, weather, sports, health reports, business & consumer news. Political Unit (NY & DC) The unit that covers presidential campaigns for the network and produces and coordinates coverage across all broadcast & digital platforms. Press Office (NY) The department that handles publicity for all CBS News broadcasts. Radio News (NY & DC) The network radio station with hourly newscasts, instant coverage of breaking stories, special reports, updates, features, customized reports and newsfeed material for 500+ affiliates. Special Events (DC) This unit covers scheduled news events, breaking news stories and long term logistical projects related to VIP coverage and Field remotes for the network news division. ”CBS Sunday Morning” (NY) A weekly broadcast reviewing events of the preceding week, covering the world of fine art, music, nature, sports, science and Americana. Weekend News (NY & DC) The weekend edition of Evening News broadcast. It features reports and interviews by CBS News correspondents covering events, trends, and issues around the world.




