Gov. Cuomo has hired two Florida fundraisers, a sign he’s building a national network to launch a presidential bid, sources told The Post.

The two consultants — one is former Hillary Clinton money man Jon Adrabi — will help plan events and build relationships with Democratic donors in the key swing state, sources said.

“Hiring out-of-state fundraising staff, particularly in a battleground state, opens up money spigots beyond what would normally be available and is a key first step to laying the groundwork for a run,” said one source, a Democratic operative, who said Cuomo’s plan is to hire political consultants with experience outside of New York.

Cuomo, 59, has repeatedly denied he wants to run for higher office and said he is focused on re-election to his third term in 2018.

The governor has been expanding his national profile since the Democrats’ dreadful showing in November.

In December, the Democratic Governors Association tapped him to serve as its influential policy chair. Among several recent out-of-state trips, he hobnobbed with colleagues at a Feb. 24 National Governors Association dinner in Washington D.C. after skipping the event six years running. He addressed a building trades conference in Florida on March 3. And he flew to Jerusalem in a 15-hour whirlwind jaunt to promote trade and meet Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu the next day.

“When Hillary Clinton was running he never wanted to have anyone speculate he’s running, but now the strategy is pretty different,” said Karen Hinton, a former Cuomo aide. “He is positioning himself to be seen as a liberal who can speak to a national audience.”

State Democratic Party director Basil Smikle Jr. — who was referred to The Post by the governor’s office — did not dispute the Sunshine State hiring, and said Cuomo “always fundraises across the country and uses local consultants.” Adrabi declined to comment.

Cuomo is looking to add even more gold to his $22 million campaign war chest: he has several fundraisers planned next month, including a dinner at the St. Regis where tickets cost $15,000 per person. Sources say a South Florida event is also in the works.

His focus on out-of-state fundraising is a sign he wants to get a jump on other Democratic hopefuls, consultants say.

“Florida is a critical state not just for electoral value but for connecting with influencers and raising money,” said Dan Gerstein, who advised former Connecticut Sen. Joe Lieberman in his presidential run.

“This is all within the normal playbook,” he added. “If you are serious about positioning yourself for a possible candidacy you start early.”
