Texas Rep. Beto O'Rourke (D)

Confirming media reports from a few days ago, Democratic Rep. Beto O'Rourke announced on Friday that he would challenge GOP Sen. Ted Cruz in next year's Senate race in Texas. O'Rourke's move gives Democrats a plausible candidate who could conceivably put this race in play, but he faces exceptionally long odds in a solidly red and ginormously expensive state that hasn't elected a Democrat statewide since 1994—the longest such streak anywhere in the nation.

For O'Rourke to have any sort of chance, a whole lot of things that are out of his control would have to go his way. In particular, he'd need 2018 to turn into a massive anti-Trump wave that fires up Democrats in droves and keeps dismayed Republicans on the couch. But as David Beard points out in a thoughtful essay making the case for O'Rourke, the last time Republicans went into a midterm with a president as unpopular as Trump occupying the White House—that would be 2006—Democrats picked up Senate seats in states like Missouri and Montana, and even made Tennessee competitive.

Everyone knows how nasty a competitor Cruz is, though, and he's more than capable of raising all the money he needs to. But Beard makes another good point: Cruz doesn't have any experience winning a contested general election. While it feels like his unctuous, loathsome presence has haunted us forever, Cruz only has two races under his belt: last year's failed presidential bid and his original run for Senate in 2012. That year, while he impressively knocked off the GOP establishment's preferred candidate, he waltzed through November. He has zero experience actually appealing to a broader audience. Does he have it in him to moderate his image even a little bit?

There are also a lot of difficult things O'Rourke has to do that he does have control over. In particular, he'll need a lot of money—$20 million to $30 million, at least. But does he have it in him to run a disciplined campaign filled with lots and lots of call time to donors? That's far from clear. A compelling new profile of O'Rourke from the Texas Tribune's Abby Livingston highlights a number of the congressman's quirky approaches to this race.
