I don't know how Beto O'Rourke is going to beat Ted Cruz. He doesn't know either:

Rep. Beto O'Rourke “I’m not going to do this and lose,” O’Rourke told the Tribune between bites. “I’m only going to do this if we can win, and I’m going to run to win, and I know no [Democrat has] figured out how to do this.” ​​​​​​... How in the world does he plan to beat Ted Cruz? “Tactically, strategically, I don’t know,” O’Rourke said. “It’ll come from Texas, and I have faith and trust the people of this state will make the best decision in the interest of their families and their kids…I just trust that. My challenge, I guess, is to meet enough of them so that they can make an informed decision.”

Beto makes it clear he needs zero help from the Washington party committees. Rightly so! They're irrelevant and he doesn't need them. The could go all in and they'd only move the needle a point or two at best. What he needs, and he knows it, is a Texas Campaign. He doesn't need endorsements, or a compliant media, some ideological crusade or the ridiculous apparatchiks of the party machinery. Just him and lots and lots of people:

“Since 1988, when Lloyd Bentsen won re-election to the Senate, Democrats have spent close to a billion dollars on consultants and pollsters and experts and campaign wizards and have performed terribly,” he said. ​​​​​​... O’Rourke, however, spent much of his time in the lead up to Friday’s announcement in mid-sized towns, including: Wichita Falls, College Station, Killeen, Lubbock, Midland, Waco, Corpus Christi and Odessa. O’Rourke said he had expected a few dozen attendees at each of these events. Oftentimes, over a hundred people showed up, having heard of the event through word-of-mouth or Facebook.

Lets face it: he's going to be outspent. Ted Cruz will have plenty of money. All of the Texas GOP Establishment is going to be behind Cruz. (The Washington GOP... probably wouldn't mind seeing him beaten as they have a favorable map next year). As the game gets tough believe you me it will, Beto will need to go on the air with defense.

Beto has moxie, youth, energy, and hopefully a fresh, timely message. I suspect he will be able to raise a lot of money online. Beto can beat Cruz. I believe that. But, it won't be easy. All of these factors together on their best day probably still isn't enough to win a Texas statewide race.

But if you add those things together plus a little bit of luck, you got a whole new ballgame.

I think Beto O'Rourke has got good luck. When it comes to any game in life, I'd rather have good luck over any other factor.
