CLOSE Skip in Skip x Embed x Share We take a look at the job approval numbers for Sentators Ron Johnson and Tammy Baldwin and look ahead towards Baldwin’s reelection possibilities in 2018.

Nicole Schneider (Photo: Handout photo)

With a growing number of Republicans weighing whether to make a run against Democratic U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin in 2018, a new name from outside the political world has gained attention.

Nicole Schneider of Green Bay appears to be considering a bid. She is the daughter-in-law of the late Donald Schneider, who built Schneider National Inc., and she has the potential to self-fund a campaign.

Media Trackers first reported Tuesday that Schneider's name was surfacing as a potential GOP candidate.

Schneider has a doctorate in social policy from Brandeis University and is a part-time research officer at Green Bay Area Catholic Education System.

Recently, Schneider National, long a privately held company, filed documents for an initial public offering. Members of the Schneider family will get around $230 million from the sale of stock, documents indicate.

In a statement to the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, Schneider sounded like someone interested in exploring the possibility of making a run. She also criticized Baldwin.

"As a life-long Green Bay-area resident and the mother of four children, I care deeply about the people of Wisconsin and the challenges facing our state and our country," she said.

"I believe America’s biggest challenges continue to be neglected," she said. "Career politicians have been all talk and no action. Everyone blames each other and nothing gets done. Senator Tammy Baldwin has spent her entire life advancing her own political career first in Madison and then in Washington. Clearly, Washington is broken and I believe Senator Baldwin is part of the problem."

RELATED:GOP mega-donor Richard Uihlein backs Kevin Nicholson with $2 million to challenge Tammy Baldwin

RELATED:Ex-senator Tim Cullen won't run for Wisconsin governor

RELATED:Baldwin says Sheriff Clarke is being 'groomed' for Senate bid

RELATED:Baldwin opposes GOP health care plan at friendly town hall

POLITIFACT:Testing Baldwin's claim on 'Trumpcare'

Schneider said the state "needs a strong, conservative voice," and added: "My family and I are examining options to become more politically active and to champion the conservative causes we believe in."

Gillian Drummond of the Democratic Party of Wisconsin defended Baldwin's record.

"Tammy's helping to build a Wisconsin economy that works for everyone, not just those at the top," Drummond said. "Just last week, she was in Neenah to reintroduce Buy America legislation that would create and retain jobs in the Fox Valley. Tammy has never been afraid to take on the rigged system by closing the revolving door between Washington and Wall Street, cracking down on China's cheating, and hold activist hedge funds accountable."

The GOP has no shortage of potential candidates to face Baldwin. They include Madison businessman Eric Hovde, who finished behind former Gov. Tommy Thompson in a 2012 Republican primary for senate; state Sen. Leah Vukmir of Wauwatosa; state Rep. Dale Kooyenga of Brookfield; U.S. Marine veteran and Milwaukee-area businessman Kevin Nicholson; and Senate Majority Leader Scott Fitzgerald of Juneau.

Read or Share this story: https://jsonl.in/2nB1UKw
