What oh what to DO with you little man?

This is just a quick hit. Boy, Mike Flynn sure is a heap o’ trouble isn’t he? First he makes a fool of himself at the Republican convention. Then he gets caught apparently colluding with the Russian ambassador to undermine a sitting President on sanctions he imposed. And now, desperate to save his own ass, he’s getting the cold shoulder on immunity from congress.

Back when it came to light that Flynn had gone to Russia in 2015, and received money from the Russians for a speech he gave, it opened a can of worms. Turns out he was in violation of Defense rules. Even though Flynn was formally retired, he is still a flag officer, and as such is subject to recall at any time. Acceptance of the payment violated the emoluments clause, since he did not obtain Defense permission to go there or receive comp treatment or money. Theoretically, he could still be court martialed, and a reduction in rank would adversely affect his military pension.

Full disclosure. I am not an expert on Military law or procedures, nor any other kind of law for that matter. I am however smart enough to know that you never answer a cops question without your lawyer present ( I was accused of criminal stupidity, and received a life sentence with it). But the deeper Flynn sinks in the septic tank, it brought a question to my mind that I’d really like to know the answer to, and maybe a fellow Kossack will have the answer.

Forget emoluments, Flynn has more important things to worry about. Flynn is being investigated for, and if current perceptions hold true, may well be charged with felonies having to do, not with emoluments, but with cons[piracy and collusion with a foreign power. To say the least, Flynn is in the hurt locker.

Here’s my question. The military could court martial and sanction Flynn for the emoluments violation. Whether he is ever convicted of collusion or conspiracy with a foreign power by the government, could the military look at this evidence, and decide that there is enough evidence there to charge him under the military code of conduct, not only court martial him, but dishonorably discharge him, stripping him of his military pension, or possibly even slap him in military prison?

Maybe nobody out in the paradise of Kos knows either, but I’m hoping somebody here spent time in like the JAG’s office, or had enough familiarity with the military justice system to have an answer. You have to admit, it’s an intriguing thought, and if a real possibility may be helping to fuel Flynn’s desperation.
