Mosul Airstrike: I'm Not Sure How Much More Of This Crap I Can Take Hawra Hassan is four years old. She lives in Mosul, Iraq, which we bombed the other day, killing 200 civilians. The wounds on Hawra’s face were manufactured here in the USA. Mosul was called Nineveh in the Bible. It was to Nineveh, whom Yahweh... 1 Recs

Trump announces he will cooperate with Russian hacking probe. In an early Saturday morning press release Whitehouse announced they will cooperate with Russian hacking investigations. Trump said we have to figure out what the hell is going on. I have assigned a very special team of investigators the same crack... 0 Recs

A Tale of Two O'Reillys I awoke this morning to two contradictory emails from sources that could not be more unrelated — Barnes & Noble and The New York Times. Best to let the emails speak for themselves. Although first, lest anyone get the notion, it’s important to... 1 Recs

Russian Money Laundering --> President Trump The scandal now becomes pretty clear. Trump was tanking financially. No legitimate banks would loan to him. His lifeline was partnering with Manafort and Kushner to launder the money of Russian oligarchs by way of New York real estate. Of course Putin... 3 Recs

DKos Asheville Open Thread: May 6th Brunch Asheville Brunch Meet Up, May 6th, 2017 When: Saturday, May 6th — 10:00 AM - 2:00 PM Where: TBD Why: Community, friends, tools, networking, food and fun Food: TBD Attendees: Gordon20024, 5 Recs

Why Should I Care If Your Kids Eat Free? Why Should I Care if Your Kids Eat Free? By Tamer Mokhtar, Chrystal Doyle & Bud Cothern You are in 3rd grade and you’re 8 years old. After a morning filled with a math lesson, a spelling quiz, and comparing your old and tattered Pokemon... 5 Recs

Charleston shooter Dylann Roof pleads guilty to state charges Surprised no one’s mentioned this, but a measure of sanity has finally prevailed in the Charleston church shooting case. You may know that Dylann Roof has wanted to plead guilty since soon after confessing to the butchery at Mother Emanuel. However,... 1 Recs

Glacier Park: Lake McDonald Lodge Area (Photo Diary) The Lake McDonald area in what is now Glacier National Park was a tourist destination long before the national park was created. In 1895, George Snyder constructed his Snyder Hotel on the shore of ... 10 Recs

CUA Events: Maine—4/22, NYC—4/23, Glacier—6/30, NN17 C&J Dinner—8/9! Moving on or moving out? A daily series, Connect! Unite! Act! seeks to create face-to-face networks in each congressional district. Groups regularly socialize but also get out the vote, support candidates and engage in ... 21 Recs

Republican strategist Rick Wilson calls Trumpcare a "flatulent mass" and calls Trump "a snake" Enjoy this roughly 1-minute rant by Republican strategist Rick Wilson. I think he sums up our grifter-in-chief Donald Trump perfectly, especially when he explains how Trump tried to sell Americans on his "flatulent mass” known as Trumpcare. I... 18 Recs

Are Trump voters suffering buyer's remorse yet? If you watch late night TV, you’ve surely seen the ads for products ‘not available in stores.’ If you’ve ever bought one of these highly-touted items, there’s a good chance you’ve been disappointed. They seldom work the way they’re claimed to work in... 5 Recs

Views that Perpetuate Gender Inequality Are Mainstream. What Should Democrats Do? Old school attitudes about women aren’t going anywhere in our culture. We just elected a President who bragged about grabbing pussy. We elected a VP who follows the Billy Graham Rule . As a ... 5 Recs

CSGOPOTD: April Fool's Edition 2017 Well, this one shouldn’t take much explaining. Chaka Fattah was the U.S. House Representative from Pennsylvania’s 2nd Congressional District who was found guilty on 23 separate charges of racketeering, money laundering, and fraud stemming from a failed... 1 Recs

ISIS war minister Jumaili likely KIA by coalition airstrike www.n-tv.de/… He was some war minister for ISIS. He got killed in Anbar province near the Syrian border. www.hindustantimes.com/… Ayad al-Jumaili, the man believed to be the deputy of Islamic State leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, has been... 0 Recs

Beto O'Rourke plans hard work, retail style campaign I don't know how Beto O'Rourke is going to beat Ted Cruz. He doesn't know either: “I’m not going to do this and lose,” O’Rourke told the Tribune between bites. “I’m only going to do this if we can win, and I’m going to run to win, and I... 7 Recs

Kansas Special Election: Grassroots Donations fund Thompson (D) to keep up with Estes (R) Although the Georgia race is getting all the coverage in media and DAILYKOS — The race for the House seat vacated by CIA Director Mike Pompeo is the nation's first congressional election since President Donald Trump's victory. The special election is... 1 Recs

Trump apologizes for everything A chastened and humbled Donald Trump slumped towards the first tee of the Chevy Chase Country Club this morning, and after two swings which completely missed their intended target, the Faux President turned to reporters from MSNBC, CNN, and said, “You... 1 Recs

Trump Bullies and Belittles Chuck Todd's Appearance. This Is Just Beyond Embarassing I make it a point in my daily life to never make fun of someones appearance. There are a lot of people out there that have lost the genetic lottery. They have been beaten severely with the ugly stick. You may say that Chuck Todd is one of those... 1 Recs

I hate April 1 I can’t take this shit. See y’all tomorrow. 2 Recs
