The Russiagate debacle – from election interference to collusion with the trump team – continues to unfold at lightning speed.

We’ve all read trump’s comments and tweets along the way.

However – when compiled, his denials, diversions and distractions make it clear (at least to me) he’s guilty of collusion with Russia.

Not just people on his team — him.

On June 14, 2016, we first heard about Russia hacking the DNC when it was reported that CrowdStrike, the cyber-security company the DNC hired to look into the hack, confirmed it. www.washingtonpost.com/...

The next day, June 15, trump releases a bizarre statement saying:

“We believe it was the DNC that did the 'hacking' as a way to distract from the many issues facing their deeply flawed candidate and failed party leader. Too bad the DNC doesn't hack Hillary Clinton's 33,000 missing emails." www.cnn.com/…

Once Russiagate heats up over the summer, he starts his “maybe, maybe not” Russia narrative:

July 25 tweet: “The new joke in town is that Russia leaked the disastrous DNC e-mails, which should never have been written (stupid), because Putin likes me.”

July 27, 2016, he said, “They hacked—they probably have her 33,000 emails. I hope they do. Russia, if you’re listening, I hope you’re able to find the 30,000 emails that are missing.” www.nytimes.com/...

September 2016, during the first debate with HRC, he said, “I mean, it could be Russia, but it could also be China. It could also be lots of other people. It also could be somebody sitting on their bed that weighs 400 pounds, okay?” www.washingtonpost.com/…

October 2016, during the second debate, after US intelligence agencies confirm the Russia hacking, he said: “… Maybe there is no hacking.” www.politico.com/…

After he wins the 2016 GE, he’s mostly quiet on Russiagate and instead talks about his big inauguration crowds, complains about anti-trump protesters, and blasts the press for criticizing his sloppy transition.

By December thru early January, 2017, he starts the “hacking is hard to prove” narrative and makes other odd statements.

December 9, 2016, his team ridicules the CIA’s confirmation of Russian hacking saying, “These are the same people that said Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction.” www.washingtonpost.com/…

By December 11, he tells FOX: “Nobody really knows, and hacking is very interesting. Once they hack, if you don’t catch them in the act you’re not going to catch them.” www.foxnews.com/…

On December 12, he tweets: “Unless you catch "hackers" in the act, it is very hard to determine who was doing the hacking.”

By the end of December he’s still saying this: “I know a lot about hacking. And hacking is a very hard thing to prove. So it could be somebody else. And I also know things that other people don’t know, and so they cannot be sure of the situation.” www.nytimes.com/...

In early January he tweeted: Julian Assange said "a 14 year old could have hacked Podesta" - why was DNC so careless? Also said Russians did not give him the info! https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump’

On January 6, he starts using the phrase, witch hunt: “To some extend it’s a witch hunt.” http://thehill.com/policy/technology/313009-trump-russian-hacking-controversy-a-witch-hunt

During his January 11 press conference, he conceded the Russians were behind the hack then took it back a moment later: “As far as hacking, I think it was Russia … it could have been others also.” www.nytimes.com/...’

As Russiagate continues to steamroll, and the Steele dossier gains traction, he attempts to distract with his “illegal leaks” and “Fake News” war on the press:

February 12, he goes from calling CNN “Fake news” to “Very fake news.” www.huffingtonpost.com/…

February 14, Flynn resigns/is fired, and trump starts complaining about illegal leaks: “The real story here is why are there so many illegal leaks coming out of Washington?” www.washingtonpost.com/...

On February 16, trump calls all news outlets reporting on his staff’s contact with Russian officials, “Fake news.” www.cnn.com/...

On February 24, he says at CPAC: “I want you all to know that we are fighting the fake news. It’s fake, phony, fake. “A few days ago, I called the fake news ‘the enemy of the people,’ and they are. They are the enemy of the people. Because they have no sources. They just make them up when there are none.” www.politico.com/...

On February 26, trump spokeswoman, Sarah Sanders, outright lies: “The FBI has already said this story is BS ….” www.theguardian.com/...

On the same day, trump tweets: “Russia talk is FAKE NEWS put out by the Dems, and played up by the media, in order to mask the big election defeat and the illegal leaks!”

Then the “Obama wire-taped me” distraction begins to divert attention from trump team’s connections to shady Russians — some who may well be spies.

March 4, 2017, he posts two tweets accusing President Obama of wire-tapping trump tower (also see www.politifact.com/...):

“Terrible! Just found out that Obama had my "wires tapped" in Trump Tower just before the victory. Nothing found. This is McCarthyism!”

“How low has President Obama gone to tapp my phones during the very sacred election process. This is Nixon/Watergate. Bad (or sick) guy!”

By March 16, Sean Spicer, using Fox talking head Judge Napolitano as his source, suggests Obama used UK intelligence agency GCHQ to wiretap trump. www.politifact.com/...

March 17, UK Prime Minister dismisses the false claim they wiretapped trump for Obama and Fox News distances themselves from Napolitano’s lie. www.politifact.com/…

The same day, March 17, trump praises Judge Napolitano as a reliable source for the”UK did it” claim. thehill.com/…

The next day, March 18, in a news conference with German Chancellor Merkel, trump says: “As far as wiretapping I guess by this past administration, at least we have something in common, I guess.” www.cnn.com/...

March 20, while FBI Director Comey was testifying before Congress, trump tweets (lies): “the NSA and FBI tell Congress that Russia did not influence the electoral process.” Comey outright refuted this tweet as soon as it was read to him, in real time, during his televised testimony. www.nbcnews.com

Also during his March 20 testimony, Comey completely debunked trump’s claim that Obama wiretapped trump tower.

The same day, March 20, trump sends out a series of tweets (lies) trying to put the focus on HRC:

March 20: “What about all of the contact with the Clinton campaign and the Russians? Also, is it true that the DNC would not let the FBI in to look?”

March 20: “The Democrats made up and pushed the Russian story as an excuse for running a terrible campaign. Big advantage in Electoral College & lost!”

March 20: “James Clapper and others stated that there is no evidence Potus colluded with Russia. This story is FAKE NEWS and everyone knows it!”

The day after Comey’s testimony, Nunes was dispatched to find evidence that “proves” trump was right (and Comey was wrong) about Obama wiretapping trump tower.

March 21, Nunes travels to White House grounds to review evidence of potential surveillance of Trump associates but this incident is not disclosed until the next day. http://www.factcheck.org/2017/03/spinning-the-intel-hearing/

March 22, Nunes holds a press conference and says an unnamed individual(s) showed him intelligence reports indicating the Obama administration captured communications involving Trump and/or his associates. Then trump says he’s been vindicated.www.axios.com/...

March 23 trump tweets: “Just watched the totally biased and fake news reports of the so-called Russia story on NBC and ABC. Such dishonesty!”

March 23 thru March 27, Nunes offers conflicting explanations about “new evidence” Obama wiretapped trump that he revealed in his press conference: www.axios.com/…

Once the Nunes attempt to vindicate trump appeared dead on arrival, trump returned to his Fake News messaging with several more tweets diverting attention to the Clintons:

March 27: “...money to Bill, the Hillary Russian "reset," praise of Russia by Hillary, or Podesta Russian Company. Trump Russia story is a hoax.”

March 27: “Why isn't the House Intelligence Committee looking into the Bill & Hillary deal that allowed big Uranium to go to Russia, Russian speech....”

March 28: “Why doesn't Fake News talk about Podesta ties to Russia as covered by @FoxNews or money from Russia to Clinton - sale of Uranium?”

March 29: “If the people of our great country could only see how viciously and inaccurately my administration is covered by certain media!”

March 29: “Remember when the failing @nytimes apologized to its subscribers, right after the election, because their coverage was so wrong. Now worse!”

March 30, Flynn’s lawyer says Flynn has a Russiagate story to tell if he gets immunity.

Today, March 31, trump tweet implies he has nothing to fear: “Mike Flynn should ask for immunity in that this is a witch hunt (excuse for big election loss), by media & Dems, of historic proportion!”

Deny, divert, distract, obfuscate, lie and say others are lying. Maybe I’ve watched too many true crime shows, but isn’t this exactly what guilty suspects do? Consistently? Of course it is.
