Surprised no one’s mentioned this, but a measure of sanity has finally prevailed in the Charleston church shooting case. You may know that Dylann Roof has wanted to plead guilty since soon after confessing to the butchery at Mother Emanuel. However, federal and state prosecutors refused to take the death penalty off the table—a condition that no defense attorney could honorably accept. To my mind, that means the death sentence imposed on Roof at the federal level amounts to punishing one act of barbarism with another.

Well, state prosecutors have finally decided to get off the soapbox. On Friday, they announced a plea deal in which Roof will plead guilty to all state charges pending against him in return for a sentence of life without parole.

Roof, 22, was convicted in January of 33 federal charges, including hate crimes, and sentenced to death for killing nine black worshippers at Emanuel AME Church. However, 9th Circuit Solicitor Scarlett Wilson also was pursuing the death penalty for nine state murder charges, proceedings that had been on hold since the end of Roof's federal trial. She let families of Roof's victims know early Friday she is accepting a guilty plea instead.

Wilson said that a plea deal provides “an insurance policy” in the event that the federal death sentence is overturned; it assures that Roof will spend the rest of his life behind bars.

Frankly, I’m at a loss to understand why this hasn’t happened sooner. I wondered the same thing about the Dzokhar Tsarnaev case. Tsarnaev, like Roof, had wanted almost from the beginning to plead guilty, but federal prosecutors refused to rule out that he would still get the death penalty.

What the federal prosecutors in both the Tsarnaev and Roof cases effectively said is that there are certain crimes that are so heinous that those who commit them effectively forfeit the right to plead guilty. To my mind, they are effectively saying that certain people are below the law. I would hope that Roof’s attorneys argue this when he appeals his federal death sentence.

This case is the strongest evidence yet that the death penalty is inherently inhumane. If certain crimes are too heinous to allow someone to plead guilty and avoid execution, something is very wrong.

Let’s make one thing clear—Roof’s crimes were absolutely heinous, and there is no question that he should never be allowed to live among us again. But there is no justifiable reason for why he should be executed. It would be far better to make him spend the rest of his life in prison, then make him go before the Supreme Judge for whatever further punishment he may deserve.
