Now Bill O'Reilly can take Donald Trump seriously.

Last night, Donald Trump had a couple of beers like a normal guy, then went to sleep before midnight, and slept a little more than eight hours. When he woke up this morning, feeling energized and refreshed, he decided to forgo his signature wig and his Twitter phone.

At a staff meeting, he outlined a new vision for his presidency. “Our top priority is still helping the rich,” he said, very coherently, “but now we don’t want to look like incompetent, cruel bastards while we do that. So first of all, instead of cutting Meals on Wheels, we’ll double its budget.”

“What about the wall?” Steve Miller asked eagerly.

“We’ll just say we’re waiting on Mexico to save up the money to pay for it, and leave it at that,” Trump answered.

“And what about the National Endowment for the Arts?” Kellyanne Conway asked.

“That’s still on the chopping block,” Trump reassured.

“And what does Master Putin have to say about all this?” Sean Spicer asked nervously.

“As long as our foreign policy on the Eastern Hemisphere lines up with Russia’s, Master Putin is not too concerned with what happens in this hemisphere,” Trump explained.

“On the matter of Hillary Clinton,” Jeff Sessions chimed in, “I asked a couple of guys if they’d be interested in being a special prosecutor, but they both said they thought it was too petty and vindictive. I haven't talked to Ken Starr yet, though.”

“Don’t,” Trump said. “I want him to be an ambassador.” Trump seemed very relaxed. Leaning back in his chair, he explained: “It was nice at my rallies to get that emotional boost from my crowds telling me to lock her up, but now that I'm getting my full eight hours of sleep each night, I just don’t need that kind of energy anymore. I hope to mend fences with Hillary so that she’ll come to my fourth wedding. I don't know who my fourth wife will be yet, but I do know I want Hillary on the guest list.”

Trump will spend most of the rest of the day getting a crash course in Republican orthodoxy from Vice President Mike Pence. After dinner and another couple of beers, Trump looks forward to another full eight hours of sleep.

So maybe now we’ll have a president who is still bad, but only slightly worse than George W. Bush.

As they were leaving the White House for the day, Spicer talked to Conway for a little bit. “It sure was nice today to check his Twitter and find no new dumb tweets to have to explain,” Spicer said to his colleague. “I could really get used to this.”

“Don’t get used to it,” Conway said. “Check today’s date.”
