Virginia.

It is a truth universally acknowledged, that a candidate running for office, must be in want of campaign funds.

Tonight is a campaign money deadline.

You can go to 90for90 and pick a candidate running in your district, and donate. Believe me, they will be grateful.

This year in Virginia, we have been extraordinarily lucky in the number of people running.

The Resistance has begun in Virginia — 2017.

Please read all the candidate diaries by pdxbuckeye HERE.

We have Resistance Candidates!!

We have many Democratic candidates who have stepped up to run for office. I don’t like to choose. So here is 90for90’s website which lists them all.

They have persisted — running for office, and telling us what they want to do for their communities.

These candidates put themselves out front to run. They’ve weathered a lot already, and they have not wavered. They seem more committed than ever, to make the Virginia’s legislature Blue..

What an admirable goal.

Best April Fools joke on Republicans would be to give money to the Democratic candidates so that they can run with agility against their opponents.

These candidates have shown camaraderie for each other. They have brought forth their candidate colleagues, and told us about their campaigns. Indeed they have written candidate diaries for their candidate friends! And they campaigned in support with their candidate friends. Even here at Daily Kos, in the comments of Virginia related diaries, they supported each other. That is unusual to see. And, honestly, it has warmed my heart.

Here are some whose diaries I’ve read, here at Daily Kos:

Virginia HD 51 - Ken Boddye DONATE

Virginia HD 21 - Tom Brock -DONATE

Virginia HD 50 - Lee Carter . DONATE

Virginia HD 73 -- Sarah Smith — DONATE

Virginia HD 31 - Elizabeth Guzman — DONATE

Virginia HD 56 - Lizzie Drucker Basch — DONATE

Virginia HD 25 - Angela Lynn — Donate

Virginia HD 18 - Tristan Shields — DONATE

Virginia HD 13 - Mansimran S. Kahlon — DONATE

Virginia HD 28 - Karen Hyland — DONATE

Virginia has off year elections. The Virginia House of Delegates will be facing elections this year.

So please, before midnight, find a candidate and donate:
