Google images - the first 20 of many

Rachel: She said she won’t do her end of show Friday cocktail segment - but said that shouldn’t stop us.. so I opened a chilled bottle of white wine…

Meanwhile her show brings us more heavy duty stuff — new information— about how the Russians helped Trump not only win the general, but also the nomination.

I wonder if at any point they realized how mentally unstable he was. I wonder if they thought this would benefit them if he beat the odds and he won. Big question asks Rachel: we know Putin wanted to hobble Hillary if she won, but what about Trump made him use his spy agencies to help Trump become the nominee?

Was there collusion during the primaries?

Was all the Russians cared about was having a puppet in the White House to advance their limited interests like military aid to Ukraine?

Or did they also want to have Trump with his fascist cronies destroy American democracy and undermine our international role? That of course is an interest, hell, an obsession, with Putin.

He wants to be an equal power with the United State just like the good old days of the Cold War where us elders had air raid drills and hid under our desks at schools.

Did the Russians have any interest in having a president so paranoid that through intermediaries – actual spies perhaps like Flynn, Manafort, or Bannon – could manipulate him?

Want to get deeper into a plausible conspiracy theory?

Did Putin select Tillerson to be Secretary of State, perhaps through Bannon or someone else? (Trump, it’s been reported, never knew him)…

Putin claimed that he didn’t really know Tillerson very well, “maybe met him two or three times.”

Rachel’s staff did a simple Google Image search( see my image) and found at least six meetings, especially notable those of Putin giving Tillerson the highest medal that could be given to a non-citizen.

Now Rachel reports that the State Department has been unusually silent about the increasing Russian crackdown on dissident demonstrators.

In the past Republican and Democratic State Departments would have been expressing outrage instead of the one namby pamby early statement they issued.
