Milwaukee County Sheriff David Clarke ("D")

Oh, just lovely. Some mouthbreathers in Wisconsin are pushing Milwaukee County Sheriff David Clarke, who is by many leagues the worst Democrat to hold elective office in America, to run against (actual) Democratic Sen. Tammy Baldwin—whom they repeatedly call a "liberal lesbian extremist" in their recruitment pitch. In response, Clarke, an unhinged Trump backer who's still angling for a job with the administration, would only say, "I love being sheriff of Milwaukee County. I never say never, but that's not really at the top of my list right now." But obviously he had no problem with the epithets his supporters have hurled at Baldwin.

Clarke would have to change parties in order to wage a Senate bid, and who knows? Maybe he could win. After all, Trump did carry Wisconsin. But no matter what, he'll have to change something if he wants to stay in office. A new PPP poll of voters in Milwaukee County find Clarke exceptionally unpopular: Just 31 percent say they approve of the job he's doing while 62 percent disapprove.

More importantly, among self-identified Democrats, his approval score is just 18-75, and just 13 percent of Democratic primary voters say they'd support him for re-election while 82 percent prefer "someone else." While generic ballot matchups like these can often make incumbents look weaker than they are (it's easy to say you'll vote for the other guy if you're picturing Progressive Jesus), these numbers are just brutal for Clarke. Of course, it only makes sense: Democrats don't really take too kindly to Democrats who suck up to Trump and call Black Lives Matters protesters "thugs, creeps, criminals, and race-hustlers."

All that Team Blue needs is an actual candidate to take on Clarke, who's up for re-election next year. Given the kind of shape the sheriff is in, it shouldn't be too hard to find someone who's willing to bring Clarke's ignominious career to an end—though Baldwin needs to watch out, because he could just jump into her race instead.
