Last summer's scorching, prolonged heat and drought led to north Georgia wildfires in the fall.

Early voting has begun in Georgia’s 6th Congressional district special election.

If you’re voting for democrat Jon Ossoff, you probably don’t need to be convinced that climate change is real and that we need to reduce our carbon emissions.

But what if you have conservative 6th district family or friends who are on the fence about climate change? Maybe they’re getting worried about Georgia’s increasingly long and scorching summers. Or maybe they were alarmed by last fall’s wildfires, and the haze and odor that permeated metro-Atlanta.

voteclimatega6.com is a handy website that addresses why Georgians should “vote climate” in the 6th district election. The site is a fast read and easy to digest. It’s a high level view of how climate change is already affecting Georgia and its residents.

If the candidates have an official position on climate change, it’s on the website. And if the candidates don’t, well, that’s noted, too. I’d say a lack of a statement on climate change is a statement in itself. It’s nice to see the candidates’ positions on climate change all in one place, on one page.

The page on market-based climate solutions has notable links about Republicans who support reducing carbon emissions. Yep, such creatures exist.

And the page links to information about Citizens’ Climate Lobby’s “carbon fee and dividend” plan.

Citizens’ Climate Lobby proposes a similar non-partisan carbon pricing strategy. The well-researched carbon fee and dividend plan would reduce carbon emissions by 50% over 20 years, while growing the economy and jobs.

Carbon fee and dividend is a solution that places a fee on carbon at the source. From the collected fees, dividends are returned equally to all citizens to offset any minor increases that consumers might see at the gas pump or elsewhere. For people already reducing their carbon footprints, the monthly dividend could be a bit of extra cash in hand.

If you have any conservative 6th district family or friends who are growing weary of Republican’s escalating denial of science and climate change, this website might just motivate them to flip their vote and vote for a candidate who believes in and wants to slow climate change.

Please share and help inspire Georgians to #FlipThe6th!

Visit VoteClimateGa6

On the Web

On Facebook
