Surfer Finn Mcgill competes in the Volcom Pipe pro on February 9, 2017, in Oahu, Hawaii. (BRIAN BIELMANN/AFP/Getty Images)

The Alex Kurtzmann and Roberto Orci reboot of Hawaii Five-0 has already crossed over with NCIS: Los Angeles, Scorpion and MacGyver; and NCIS (classic, or stale, depending on your viewpoint) is said to be next. But why stop at crime dramas? Hawaii Five-0 could cross over with any currently running CBS show.

For example, a quantum loop theory physicist at the University of Hawaii is murdered. Cue up Sheldon Cooper (Jim Parsons) from The Big Bang Theory to help. Or try to help. Officer Kono Kalakaua (Grace Park) goes over to Caltech for some predictable jokes about how she’s stronger than Raj (Kunal Najjar).

It would be a great opportunity for the cast of The Great Indoors to get some fresh air. The Hawaii Five-0 cast, on the other hand, might feel claustrophobic in the sitcom sets.

I hesitate to suggest a crossover with Star Trek: Discovery. The biggest obstacle is whether that show gets off the ground at all. If it gets up and running, just do some time travel mumbo-jumbo and boom, crossover.

But why limit it to CBS shows? I know, I know, CBS likes to keep profits in the house whenever possible. It’s part of the reason Person of Interest was soft-cancelled with a half season last year. But let’s keep going anyway with these crossover ideas.

An American journalist and a Russian journalist both wash up dead on the shores of Oahu. Steve McGarrett (Alex O’Loughlin) is unsure whether to suspect U.S. President Frank Underwood (Kevin Spacey) or Russian President Viktor Petrov (Lars Mikkelsen) from House of Cards.

President Frank Underwood for real? That would actually be an improvement.

It’s no secret that Underwood and Petrov don’t like each other. Petrov hatches a plot to get Donald Trump (Donald Trump) from The Apprentice elected President of the United States. Petrov can’t control Underwood, but he can control Trump very easily. At the end, Petrov gives up on the idea, thinking it’s just too farfetched.

Or how about TV shows that ran long ago, like The Prisoner? In any case, there was a slight overlap between the original run of that show and the run of the original Hawaii Five-0. Number Six (maybe Jim Caviezel?) shows up in Maui, delivered by one of those bubbles. One look at CNN and he begins to wonder if he’s still on The Island.

Or how about crossing over with a documentary film? A freak snowstorm ravages Hawaii. Al Gore (Tom Hanks) and a polar bear from An Inconvenient Truth show up on a small block of ice. “The damage to our environment can’t be fixed in one hour of TV,” Gore tells McGarrett. “Storms will get stronger and more unpredictable if we just sit back and do nothing.”

“We have some cool computer display systems, like on NCIS: Los Angeles,” Kalakaua tells Gore. “I was hoping you would say that,” Gore says, pulling out a USB drive. He spends the rest of the episode explaining the results of a University of Hawaii study as summarized by Nick Cave for the Huffington Post.

Higher average temperatures, stressing native animals and plants and causing an uptick in heat-related illnesses in people (think dengue fever or cholera), as well as a higher concentration of invasive species;

A decrease in trade winds, which would disrupt the rainfall patterns across each of the islands and create periods of drought and heavy rain and flooding;

Warmer oceans and higher ocean acidity, which could trigger massive coral bleaching, marine migration, and affect the ocean’s circulation and the way it distributes nutrients.

Before the end credits, Gore goes over what people in Hawaii can do:

Utilize more rain catchment systems and conserve water;

Preserve and restore coral reefs, beaches, forests, streams, floodplains, and wetlands that have the “inherent capacity to avoid, minimize, or mitigate the impacts of climate change;”

Go back to the ways of ancient Hawaiian tradition, living along the streams and utilizing the land more efficiently and independently.

Hawaii Five-0 airs on CBS Fridays at about this time.
