Protesting feels good. Marching feels better. Running for office is best.

When I announced to run for the Virginia House of Delegates back in October, I did so with no idea of where things would be on this last day of March.

I had no idea that Donald Trump would be in the White House, or that we would have an unprecedented barrage of attacks on our friends and loved ones in various communities.

I had no idea that the new administration would stage an all out war against our civil liberties, especially so quickly.

I had no idea that I would be part of The Resistance, but here we are.

I’m running because last year I lost my mother, and her loss made me realize that I could no longer let our system leave people behind. I signed on to push the ball forward against the challenges that had already existed, not against the new ones now posed by the Trump White House and the GOP-dominated Congress.

But here we are.

Our elections in Virginia are now more important than ever. We are the first large-scale electoral answer to the new administration, and the first test of the hundreds of new groups that have sprung up across the nation. The Resistance may have been born on the day of the Women’s March, but it will be forged and tempered between now and November 7th.

We won’t stay silent, and we need to fight back.

We can’t only resist, though, we have to gain ground. No matter where you look in Virginia, there are areas where Democrats live under the representation of Republican incumbents. The Republican-dominated House of Delegates continues to pass legislation that targets immigrants and voters, and continues to kill bills that would actually improve lives.

Virginia isn’t the deep red, regressive state that our current House of Delegates would suggest. We’re the state of Thomas Jefferson, Doug Wilder and Barbara Johns. Our history is full of leaders like Dr. Ferguson Reid, and we’ve voted for Barack Obama (twice) and Hillary Clinton.

The Virginia I know fights oppression in favor of liberty, and faces its regressive history with its progressive one.

I want to embody that progressive voice in my race against Delegate Rich Anderson who has held the seat since 2009 and has only been opposed once. I want to invest in our classrooms and roadways, re-orient our criminal justice system to rehabilitate rather than incarcerate, and I want to preserve our planet for our children.

I want system of governance where people are heard regardless of how much they can donate to campaigns.

Delegate Anderson’s voting record, by contrast, is what one would expect from a party-line Republican, which more often than not puts his votes at odds with the betterment of the people of our district. He’s a representative that doesn’t represent us.

The residents of our district deserve better, they deserve progress.

Can I count on you to help me begin writing that next chapter for Virginia — for our nation — that we can all be proud of?

My website can be found here.

My donation page can be found here. Our first fundraising deadline of 2017 is tonight at Midnight, so anything you can spare would be much appreciated!
