You can see a larger version of this graphic by clicking here.

In a lengthy article by President Barack Obama published in the January 9, 2017, edition of Science magazine, the president pointed out that carbon-dioxide emissions from the U.S. energy sector dropped 9.5 percent from 2008-2015, at the same time the economy grew by 10 percent, and CO 2 emitted per dollar of gross domestic product declined by 18 percent:

The importance of this trend cannot be understated. This “decoupling” of energy sector emissions and economic growth should put to rest the argument that combatting climate change requires accepting lower growth or a lower standard of living. In fact, although this decoupling is most pronounced in the United States, evidence that economies can grow while emissions do not is emerging around the world. [...] At the same time, evidence is mounting that any economic strategy that ignores carbon pollution will impose tremendous costs to the global economy and will result in fewer jobs and less economic growth over the long term.

While it certainly seems true that the switch to renewables is irreversible, if Donald Trump were to succeed in the Koch-promoted efforts he’s already adopted to trash his predecessor’s climate-and-energy initiatives, the switch could be slowed in the states, giving China and Europe the same kind of advantage as the Danish Vestas company got when it moved ahead on wind technology after the Reagan administration abandoned America’s wind-power lead in the 1980s. The only difference between then and now being that the consequences of Trump’s actions would be for more damaging in the long run.

But Trump’s attack on Obama’s climate-related rules and other actions has many obstacles to overcome, including what likely will be a rash of lawsuits. It could be years before we know the outcome of his retrograde moves.

Opposition to Trump’s actions is, however, purely defensive. What’s needed is an accelerated approach to the transformation already underway.

The climate crisis is an emergency like no other, and it needs to be treated as such. Climate Mobilization and other environmental advocates, like Bill McKibben, co-founder of 350.0rg, say the United States should address the changing climate the way we addressed World War II. Sacrifices were made to topple the Axis. A nation already deeply in debt and far from fully emerged from the Great Depression took on far more debt and transformed its economy to meet the military threat. The reason: Most Americans didn’t think we had a choice.

The threat from climate change is greater than that of World War II. Denying it, ignoring it, failing to address it quickly are prescriptions for far more death and economic destruction than that war caused. Promoting the energy transformation, giving our agriculture and transportation systems deep makeovers, and reworking our cities are essential to fulfilling any hope that we can effectively ameliorate the impacts of climate change. Government policy at the municipal, state, regional and national level should be directed toward meeting the climate thread right now. Not in the 2020s. Not next week. Not tomorrow.

Fortunately, we have technology on our side, as the Canada Clean Energy folks point out. The claims made since the 1970s that wind and solar and other renewable sources of energy can never be anything more than niche technologies for hippies and tree-huggers can still be heard in some quarters like the Heartland Institute and, of course, the White House, but these grow ever less credible by the minute.

Adopting policies that speed up what is already happening—for instance, pushing for 100 percent renewables by 2040/50—ought to be at the top of the progressive agenda. Given who is currently in control of the federal government, the best way to do for the short run that is at the city and state level. But we need national policy to do the job right. And that obviously requires changes at the top.
