The House’s top tax writer, Ways and Means Chairman Kevin Brady, urged the administration to work off his draft. House GOP won’t defer to White House on tax reform Republicans in the House began laying plans to seize control of the tax agenda in Washington long before Trump was elected.

The White House says it’s driving the train on tax reform, and House Republicans don’t want to end up tied to the tracks.

They’ve been working on their own tax-reform proposal for more than a year and, after countless hours of work, don’t want to suddenly give up those designs just because the administration is now working on its own plan. Some worry the White House could drop a policy bomb in their midst just as reform seems within reach for the first time in decades.

Story Continued Below

“They’re going to have to come fully armed to defend it,” warns Rep. Kenny Marchant, a Republican tax writer. “We’re not discouraging other ideas,” but “they’re going to need to be prepared to do more than just, ‘I woke up last night, in the middle of the night, and thought this was a good deal.’”

His Ways and Means colleagues have been working on this “puzzle” for months, said Marchant.

Trump will huddle on tax reform today with Gary Cohn, the director of the National Economic Council; Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin; his chief strategist Steve Bannon; son-in-law and adviser Jared Kushner; Shahira Knight from the National Economic Council; and Craig Phillips and Justin Muzinich, both from Treasury.

The possibility that the administration will now propose a very different tax plan from what House Republicans have in mind — like an old-fashioned tax cut when House leaders want something bigger, bolder — threatens to complicate the already difficult fight for a once-in-a-generation tax-code rewrite.

It’s also an example of how presidential leadership on the issue — which House Republicans have yearned for since the Obama administration — comes with its own downsides.

Lawmakers know they need the president to sell controversial changes to the public, and overcome the special-interest groups sure to fight any changes. But, especially after working so long on their own plan, they also don’t want to have to suddenly rethink their entire proposal.

The House’s top tax writer, Ways and Means Chairman Kevin Brady, urged the administration to work off his draft.

“We have so much in common with the Trump administration — it wouldn’t make sense to have a separate bill from Secretary Mnuchin, a separate one from Gary Cohn, a third from whomever,” Brady told Fox Business News, referring to Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin, and Trump’s economic adviser.

“Why not take the basis of the House plan?”

House Republicans began laying plans to seize control of the tax agenda in Washington long before Trump was elected, when they released their “Better Way” tax-reform plan last June.

Since then, they’ve been working behind the scenes to find the combination of changes that can win support from a majority of their colleagues and pass muster with Congress’ nonpartisan budget scorekeepers.

Yet on Monday, White House press secretary Sean Spicer said: “Obviously, we’re driving the train on this.”

“We’re going to work with Congress on this, but I think the president” believes “this is a huge priority” and is “something he feels very passionately about,” Spicer said.

Their plan will be ready “pretty soon,” Mnuchin said last week.

No one expects the Trump administration to produce its own legislative text; the danger for House Republicans is that he could propose going in a very different direction than they’ve envisioned.

They’ve been working on an overhaul that doesn’t add to the deficit and that will comply with the Senate’s complicated budget rules.

But what if Trump suddenly calls for a just a tax cut that isn’t offset? Some Republicans believe he should do just that, in the wake of the Obamacare-repeal debacle, to ensure a bill gets to the president’s desk. Otherwise, Trump risks going 0-2 on his first two big legislative initiatives.

“Given they need a victory badly, being a little less grandiose probably makes sense,” said Stephen Moore, who helped write the Trump campaign’s tax-reform plan. “Keep it simple — just do a business tax cut and call it a jobs bill.”

Even if the administration agrees on the goal of a deficit-neutral tax reform, the two sides have disagreed on how.

For example: Republicans in Congress want to allow all businesses to immediately write off the cost of their investments, something they believe would provide a major boost to the economy over the long run. They want to pay for that in part by junking a century-old interest deduction for businesses.

Trump would do neither, except in the limited case of manufacturers. He instead proposes a deeper cut in the corporate tax rate than what House Republicans proposed. And, at least at one point in his campaign, Trump proposed an approach to international taxation that is the opposite of what House Republicans are pursuing.

Of course, it’s also possible that Trump’s plan will be a boon to House Republicans.

The president didn’t adopt their controversial border adjustment plans either, and if he backs it now, that could rejuvenate a proposal that has been widely panned by their colleagues in the Senate.

It’s hard to know what Trump might propose after he repeatedly rewrote his own tax-reform plan during his campaign, said Ryan Ellis, a Republican tax consultant.

“He had two different positions on carried interest within six months, so I don’t take past as prologue,” he said. “You can’t rely on any of that.”

It’s hardly surprising of course that an administration would have its own ideas on tax reform, and it wouldn’t be the first time that lawmakers have been at odds with their own party’s president.

Also, the two sides do agree on many things. During his campaign, Trump revised his plan to incorporate many of the ideas House Republicans offered, such as their individual tax rate structure.

Rep. Tom Reed, another Republican tax writer, said he welcomed the administration’s input.

“I think the debate would be healthy,” he said. “We’re confident enough in our own skills that, if there’s a better idea out there, we’re always going to consider it — and we’ll put out own ideas against anyone’s.”

“They have to be part of this process,” said Reed.

But what about the administration saying it’s driving the train?

“I didn’t hear that,” said Rep. Mike Kelly, another Ways and Means member. He added: “These things don’t bother me.”

Nancy Cook contributed to this report.
