Huntsville Mayor Tommy Battle is about halfway through an evaluation process to determine if he will run for governor.

Battle told AL.com he expected to make a decision by the end of April.

Battle's interest in the job comes as no surprise - he's long been speculated as a potential candidate and explored a gubernatorial run in 2014 -- but it's the first time he has publicly acknowledged that he is exploring a 2018 campaign to become the state's chief executive.

"It's just a thoughtful process, a prayerful process," Battle said in an interview with AL.com on Thursday afternoon. "It's one you look at very, very seriously. I have a great job sitting here in the city of Huntsville. It's a great community to be mayor of. It takes a lot to make you move from a great position to one that has challenges.

"The state does have challenges. At some point, those challenges have to be addressed."

Battle is in his third term as Huntsville's mayor, having won re-election the past two years with more than 80 percent of the vote - the largest mayoral election margin in the city's history. Huntsville has been one of the state's most prosperous economic regions and is on pace to become the state's largest city in about 10 years, according to U.S. Census data.

He considered a run four years ago but opted not to run against Gov. Robert Bentley, who was seeking a second term. Bentley is term-limited and cannot seek re-election.

Battle is first cousins with Bill Battle, the recently retired athletic director at the University of Alabama.

No Republicans have publicly declared their candidacy but names have begun to emerge as possibilities. Twinkle Andress Cavanaugh, chair of the Public Service Commission, has formed a campaign committee for governor but stopped short of announcing her candidacy. State Auditor Jim Zeigler has also indicated he is considering a run for governor as well as former Auburn University football coach Tommy Tuberville and Jefferson County Commissioner David Carrington.

An expected leading candidate was eliminated earlier this year when Luther Strange was appointed to the U.S. Senate by Bentley. Strange will also be on the ballot seeking election to the Senate for the first time next year, which could siphon some potential candidates away from the gubernatorial race in order to run for Senate.

Democratic names that have emerged as possibilities include former Alabama Supreme Court Chief Justice Sue Bell Cobb and former congressman Parker Griffith.

Battle, who said he will run as a Republican, added he has done no polling himself to evaluate his candidacy but he has seen polls done by other people.

"It tells you, obviously, that we would run strong in north Alabama because we're in that media market," he said. "And south Alabama and all the way down to Baldwin County (on the Gulf Coast), we've got some work to do.

"It's just a natural progression of what you do in a campaign. You've got to get your name out and tell them why you're running and what you're running for."

Battle repeatedly talked Thursday that the ability to make a difference in Montgomery was a critical factor in his thought process.

"There's only so many years in your life and you don't want to tilt at windmills," he said. "You want to make sure you make a positive difference in what you do and what you put your time and efforts into."

Along with the priority of being able to make a difference as governor, Battle said two other factors he was considering was his ability to win a statewide election as well as, if he wins, leaving his post as Huntsville's mayor.

"We're talking to a lot of friends from all over the state and letting them weigh in on it, too, and try to make a good decision," Battle said of himself and wife Eula. "It's a very, very hard decision if you decide to get into this to leave Huntsville because it's such a great place and got such great things going on.

"It's something that Mrs. Battle and I will look at, will pray about and talk about. We'll come up with an answer by the end of April."

Updated today, March 31, 2017, at 10:20 a.m. with Jefferson County Commissioner David Carrington as a potential gubernatorial candidate.
