Congressman Chaka Fattah, whose ten year prison sentence kind of makes him a gimme for CSDOTD.

Well, this one shouldn’t take much explaining. Chaka Fattah was the U.S. House Representative from Pennsylvania’s 2nd Congressional District who was found guilty on 23 separate charges of racketeering, money laundering, and fraud stemming from a failed campaign to become mayor of Philadelphia in 2007. Fattah served in Congress from 1995 through 2016, when his massive corruption scandal also saw him defeated in the Democratic Primary for his seat in the U.S. House. He now is looking at a ten year prison sentence.





Pictured: S.J. Jung, the last person who will ever push for LGBTQ rights.

S. J. Jung has twice lost in the Democratic primary to try and get elected to the New York State Senate. That might not just be because he’s opposed to LGBT rights, but he’s spoken before to a Korean religious group in his district about how he’d like to have all mention of gay people removed from school textbooks. Jung was quoted as also saying, “I pray Jesus Christ’s love to spread and his message speak through this election and your prayer of faith to make me become a warrior clad in armor.” We would not mind in the least if this intolerant tool got locked in a suit of armor and couldn’t get out, frankly.





Sheriff David Clarke of Wisconsin, who we can classify as a Democrat worthy of this column, but you’re a real slam dunk for that honor when you actually are a speaker at the OTHER PARTY’S CONVENTION.

Sheriff David Clarke is a four term sheriff of Milwaukee County in Wisconsin, and while he’s been a registered Democrat since he first took the job in 2002, his politics actually line him up with the most conservative Republicans you’ll ever find on the right. And trust us, Republicans have definitely noticed how embarrassing this guy has become to folks on the left, as he hasn’t just been a frequent guest on Fox News, or on Glenn Beck, or on Alex Jones’ InfoWars (where he called for a new American Revolution) Republicans invited him to be a speaker on the opening night of the 2016 Republican National Convention, where he decided to give a big “BLUE LIVES MATTER!” speech to stick it to Black Lives Matter protesters. (Which is stupid because nobody is “born” blue, you choose to be a cop, you’re not born one.) In early October 2016, when it appeared Donald Trump was going to lose the presidential election, Clarke had the level-headed response that it was “torches and pitchforks time” against progressives, which sort of defeats the purpose of protecting law and order, like he’s supposedly sworn to do. Clarke has further advised personal gun ownership because he feels police response isn’t adequate to respond to help protect a person (again, he’s a sheriff), and believes anyone even suspected of supporting ISIS should have their rights of habaeus corpus ignored and just have them thrown in Guantanamo Bay Prison. Oh, and in April 2016, under Clarke’s watch, an inmate named Terrill Thomas had the water turned off to his cell, and over several days, he was allowed to die of extreme dehydration. Clarke will not comment on Thomas’ death, other than remind everyone that Thomas had a criminal record, which still is no excuse from denying him of a human right to water.

Needless to say, when he’s up for re-election in 2018, Democrats might force him to actually run as a Republican, because he is about as “Democrat in Name Only” as it gets.



The Reverend Jarrett Maupin, who led anti-police violence protests in Phoenix, did such a wonderful job of it that Black Lives Matter released a statement disavowing any association with him.

Now, perhaps the closest thing Sheriff David Clarke has to an opposite number is Jarrett Maupin, a minister and failed Congressional candidate from Arizona’s 7th Congressional District in 2014, who has also led several unsuccessful campaigns to become Mayor of Phoenix. Maybe he needed a better strategy than what he tried… just accusing Mayor Phil Gordon of being a child molester to the police. (Maupin was convicted of a crime in 2009 for falsely reporting a crime after the cops spent eight months… yes MONTHS trying to find evidence Maupin claimed he’d seen with his own eyes.) Maupin feels like he’s the victim in all this, though, referring to his treatment as “political lynching”.



Perhaps the most damning statement you’ll ever find is that Maupin is “Arizona’s version of the Reverend Al Sharpton”. That’s frankly an unkind comparison to Al Sharpton, who can at least host a Black Lives Matter protest without incident. When Maupin does it, he’ll try to suddenly incite a band of untrained protesters, some with children, to block traffic by trying to walk down an on-ramp and onto the state’s busiest freeway in the dark, without any advanced thought to put some sort of lights on his flock so they can be seen without being run over (the cops thankfully stopped his idiocy). We’re going to underline this… Jarrett Maupin is such a brainless glory hound that the leaders of Black Lives Matter actually refuse to recognize him as their representative in Arizona, and disavowed his protest.



We’re going to agree with them that a “thanks but no thanks” is the best way to treat Rev. Maupin.





Congresswoman Debbie Wasserman-Schultz, who at this point, should just start the “Please Go Away Caucus”.

Once upon a time, the Democratic National Committee was run by former Gov. Howard Dean, and it was doing quite nicely. Democrats swept the 2006 elections and took control of the House and Senate, and in 2008, President Barack Obama, a progressive champion got elected under his watch. Then Debbie Wasserman-Schultz, the U.S. House of Representatives for Florida’s 23rd Congressional District, took over, and Dean’s “Fifty State Strategy” was cast aside for her… whatever she was doing for the past six years. Terrible messaging on progressive causes like the Affordable Care Act or even marijuana legalization became frequent in all of her countless cable news appearances (),



her leadership also saw a lack of cyber-security that ended up with the DNC getting hacked by Russians at the behest of Vladimir Putin to aide the Donald Trump Campaign, and she was constantly taking positions that made it look like (or that she flat-out was) bending over backwards to try and put her thumb on the scale to help Hillary Clinton beat Bernie Sanders in the 2016 Presidential Primary. After Wikileaks got the DNC’s e-mails and her stupidity from internal DNC communications was laid out before the world, it led to Wasserman-Schultz resigning as Chairwoman on the eve of the 2016 Democratic National Convention.



To quote one top DNC staffer on her departure, “Good f***ing riddance.” She still had the gall to show up to speak before the Florida delegation at the DNC, and was booed off the stage. At this point, she’s lucky she survived her primary challenge and still holds her seat in Congress. She might not survive another one in 2018.
