TRENTON -- As its longtime foe, Gov. Chris Christie, prepares to exit the governorship next January, New Jersey's largest teachers union is also pushing to get rid of the state's highest ranking lawmaker, state Senate President Stephen Sweeney, according to a report by the Philadelphia Inquirer.

The newspaper reported Monday that the New Jersey Education Association is weighing many options to oust Sweeney, a south Jersey Democrat whom the union is criticizing as someone who has frequently collaborated with Christie, a Republican, over the last seven years.

"We're looking for a new governor and a new Senate president," NJEA president Wendell Steinhauer told the Inquirer.

The union has even launched a website called Change NJ Politics that says by "working with Chris Christie, Sen. Sweeney betrayed our trust and broke his promises."

Sweeney (D-Gloucester) declined comment when reached by NJ Advance Media on Monday.

The lawmaker is up for re-election in November, when all 120 seats of the New Jersey Legislature are on the ballot.

The Inquirer reported that the NJEA is considering running a challenger against Sweeney in the Democratic primary in the state's 3rd legislative district, a Republican in the general election, or supporting a challenger in the battle for the Senate presidency, which lawmakers vote upon after the new Legislature takes office in January.

Sweeney announces plans to run for re-election

The NJEA has battled frequently with Christie since he was took office in 2010 and is backing Democratic front-runner Phil Murphy in this year's governor's race. Christie is term-limited and will see his second and final term end in January.

Sweeney, who took office in 2002 and became Senate president in 2010, has worked on numerous bipartisan policies with Christie -- most notably the 2011 pension and benefits overhaul that many public-worker unions have criticized.

But, as the Inquirer noted, defeating Sweeney is likely to be a challenge.

Sweeney has more than $860,000 in his campaign war chest, the backing of multiple super PACs, and the support of George Norcross III, a childhood friend and a powerbroker who is considered to be the most powerful non-elected Democrat in New Jersey. He is also a ironworkers union leader and has the backing of multiple organized labor organizations.

Plus, the NJEA could face backlash at a time when the Legislature is considering key issues like pension reform and school funding.

Brent Johnson may be reached at bjohnson@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @johnsb01. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.
