A number of adults in the school, including the head, have in the past few days made a similar comment, as has at least one of my students. To a large degree I am a new experience for my students, because I am not willing merely to give them worksheets that they can fill out from the book. I am explaining in more depth, I am prodding them to think more deeply. It is new for them, and perhaps a bit scary. It certainly demands more than what they have experienced, and some of them are therefore fighting me every step of the way.

But even some of those who are resisting are starting to do what I ask. And some others? In US History we are in the 1920s (remember, we go through July so there is still plenty of time to get to the present), and that includes the Harlem Renaissance and the Great Migration. Surprisingly, none of them focused on either last month for their Black History Month projects.

I chose to focus for a day on Langston Hughes, having them explore two very different poems, “What Happens to a Dream Deferred” with its warnings about the explosions and devastation that can result, and “Let America be America Be America Again” with its challenge to the notion of who should be included in the American dream and its optimism that the author (and others still excluded) will eventually be included.

A few of them were aware of Andy Shallal’s chain of Busboys and Poets restaurants, but did not know that the title was a reference to Hughes.

And a few of them were really moved by the poetry, and really dug in when I asked them to find places in the 2nd poem which challenged or move them, and then to write about those place, those words, what it meant to them.

I explained that the understanding of history can often be enhanced and enriched by looking at the art, the architecture, the poetry, the music as well as the contemporary news accounts and historical writings about it. Some are beginning to grasp it.

At the same time, a few of the others no longer try to fight me for the entire period. They have discovered that dropping F bombs or telling me they won’t do my work does not make me go off. One young lady is clearly frustrated that she can’t get me upset. Each day the amount of time she spends doing that is decreasing, now to the point that she can get through a decent amount of work.

Another thing that has somewhat frustrated and irritated some students is that even when I have them identifying things in the text I phrase things in slightly different words/language, so that they cannot merely find in the reading identical words and copy without understanding and hence learning.

Or consider the following exchange with one 9th grade boy.

Me: How did the Spanish and Portuguese treat the natives in South America.

Him: They treated them bad.

Me: That should be an adverb. They treated them badly. And what makes you say that it was badly?

Him: They made them work.

Me: Lots of people work. Why was that bad?

There were a few more exchanges until I got him to find in the reading that the Europeans didn’t want to do dirty work, especially in the mines, and the treatment was harsh, with no choice, and thus effectively slavery.

MOST of these students can do much more than they have been doing. And if I can get them engaged in doing the work and using their minds, the problems of behavior usually lesson. Usually, although I had an incident of grabbing my coffee and other items on the table from which I teach and throwing it out the window at a workman below, so now the windows, by order of the head of school, have to stay shut at all times.

Then there is the student about whom I worry the most. This student gets easily frustrated. S/he actually is of an age that schooling should no longer be provided by the District of Columbia, although an exception is made in this case. S/he is supposed to get a high school diploma at the end of this year. Yet as of less than two years ago s/he was diagnosed as reasoning at a 2nd grade level. S/he can sound out words, and can if you talk through it grasp a fair amount of the content read. BUT — there are fixed ideas that if I or anyone else try to correct result in stubborn resistance, shutting down intellectually, and a stream of obscenities. Thus this student refused to accept that the District of Columbia only outlawed the slave trade as part of the Compromise of 1850 and did not ban slavery itself until 1862. S/he insisted that Harriet Tubman brought slaves to DC to make them free. I have learned that challenging such fixed ideas is pointless, and does not help the student to learn.

I wonder what a high school diploma is supposed to represent if this student is given one. I wonder how s/he will be able to function outside a semi-sheltered environment, how to function without assistance. I wonder why it took so long for this student to be finally properly diagnosed as to reasoning level, and have at least some adults trying to help as should have been appropriate for an entire lifetime.

It is pretty clear I will not return to this school, event though they would probably love to have me. Part of it is financial — I am paid on an hourly basis at a level that could be as little as half what I could make in public school setting not so far away.

And yet, I am learning new ways of reaching students.

I am learning patience.

I am not responding to every provocation.

I let some things go — perhaps a student has for the first time worked hard all period for me, and then suddenly at the end of the period lets out a stream of obscenities. I could legitimately make a discipline referral for that, but it is far more effective at least for now to merely say that I don’t accept that language/behavior and to affirm the good work already done.

On Thursday one 9th grader actually worked for the entire period for the first time. When she wandered down to the office at the end of the period (which she should not have done) rather than challenging her on improperly leaving the room I gave her affirmation before the head of school.

So what will I do next year? I do not yet know where I will be teaching, only that I will.

I have been invited to teach a sample lesson at an international high school in Prince George’s County. This is a school of English Language Learners, and I am NOT crosstrained in teaching in such an environment per se, but much of what I tend to do as a teacher, such as relying heavily on project based learning and infusing arts and music, is part of the approach. It is a year-round position with a different calendar, and would pay a great deal of money. There are twp such school in the Prince George’s County system, and it is possible I might also be invited to visit the other, which asked for and has already received a video of me doing a sample lesson.

Tuesday evening I will visit a DC schools high school that is all boys.

So far I am avoiding the fairs (one this week, one the week after next) for the lowest performing DC schools, some of which have 11 month positions, because my guess is that I might well be offered a position on the spot, and knowing that I have a guarantee of a position in Prince George’s (which would pay at least 15,000 more) I do not feel compelled to take the first offer, and want to explore further, including the possibility of teaching in Arlington where I live, and where the openings will not even be posted until April 19.

In the meantime? I will do what I can to help my 17 young people. That’s right, I only have 17 students. I teach four subjects. I have 5 periods, in four of which I am teaching more than one subject at a time. And because of a variety of issues and the real need to differentiate according to the IEPs of the various students, I am effectively teaching at least 10 different “preps.”

I said that my title could also apply to our political environment. Where I see positive things I need to affirm them, as I do the positive things with my students. But that is a subject for a different posting, perhaps in the near future?

Peace.
