The Trump administrations, like Trump, seems to be filled with liars---Michael Flynn, briefly National Security Adviser to President Trump before being forced to resign, lies to Vice President Pence about talking to the Russians (and the Turkish government), and Vice President Mike Pence may have lied about being lied to. www.towleroad.com/…

Jeff Sessions, Trump appointed Attorney General, lies under oath to a Senate Confirmation Hearing about his contacts with the Russians www.bbc.com/…

And even Jared Kushner, President Trump’s son-in-law and White House Adviser, lied about meetings with the Russians and the Turkish government or the White House lied on Kushner’s behalf. americablog.com/…

How can you trust anyone in this Administration? Supreme Court nominee Neil Gorsuch comes across as “Mr. Clean Cut” with a pasted on simile, but in high school he bragged about founding a Fascist Forever Club in his yearbook. nypost.com/… A true sentiment or a joke? How many people would even joke about that, yet alone put it in the yearbook with their photo? In college at Columbia, he quoted Kissinger, “The illegal we do immediately, The unconstitutional takes a little longer.” under his senior yearbook photo. In college he vigorously defended President Ronald Reagan’ s Iran-Contra secret weapons sales to Iran, and argued that the Congressional illegality claim was “superficial” and that the President had the right to ignore Congress and the laws it made. He reportedly stated “Simply because members of Congress, news commentators, and folks at Columbia may not like Reagan's action does not, believe it or not, make it illegal.” He argued that Thomas Jefferson, “on his word alone”, made the Louisiana Purchase. His stance has been to support Presidential power above Congress (at least against progressive stances.) fusion.net/… A classmate stated "He’s a pleasant face masking extreme political views…... "He was always taking as far right of a position as he could, but he would make an effort to sound reasonable." So one cannot help but wonder again if Neil Gorsuch is just another Trump Fascist Shill trying to infiltrate the United States Supreme Court, as “the unconstitutional takes a little longer.” And we know how Kissinger’s advice to Nixon turned out.

But another tangled web has also just been revealed. We all know now that Michael Flynn, briefly National Security Adviser to President Trump was forced to resign for lying. But now we find out that Congressman Devin Nunes made two secret trips to the White House-- one apparently was to advise President Trump about the House of Representatives Intelligence Committee’s investigation of the Russian influence on the election and the possibilities that members of the Trump Administration colluded in the Russian efforts. Another secret trip at night was apparently to look at classified information that the White House apparently had of incidental communications by persons outside the White House with persons in the Administration, intercepted by intelligence agencies. Nunes initially hid both these contacts with the White House from his own Committee members.

Two White House aides are reported to have expedited Nunes’ visit and viewing of the classified information. One is reputed to be Michael Ellis, a White House lawyer, previously with the White House Intelligence Committee, and who previously worked for Nunes. www.nbcnews.com/... But another is reputed to be Ezra Cohen-Watnick, Senior Director for Intelligence at the White House National Security Council. Cohen-Watnick served under Michael Flynn during his brief tenure as National Security Adviser, but had also been Flynn’s protege at the Defense Intelligence Agency, prior to Flynn’s move to the NSA. When Flynn was forced to resign, the new National Security Advisor, Lt. General H. R. McMaster (and the CIA), wanted to replace Cohen-Watnick with an appointee of McMasters’ own. But Trump’s White House Chief Strategist, Steve Bannon, and Jared Kushner prevented the firing.

One article states “Flynn’s successor, Lt. Gen. H. R. McMaster, sought to remove Cohen-Watnick from the team, following input from the CIA director who pointed to problems intelligence officers had when dealing with Cohen-Watnick. Questions were raised about his ability to carry out the position of senior NSC director for intelligence programs, who oversees ties with intelligence agencies and vets information that should reach the president’s desk.”...Cohen-Watnick apparently was reviewing highly classified reports detailing the intercepted communications of foreign officials that consisted primarily of ambassadors and other foreign officials talking about how they were trying to curry favor with Trump’s family and inner circle in advance of his inauguration….” forward.com/…Read more: http://forward.com/news/367690/meet-ezra-cohen-watnick-the-secret-source-at-the-center-of-trump-russia-pro/

also see talkingpointsmemo.com/…

www.washingtontimes.com/...

Now this continued presence of Ezra Cohen-Watnick, who has access to all secret, classified information because of his position in the NSA opens the door to White House scrutiny of all FBI, CIA and other intelligence materials---In other words, the White House is in the position to obstruct its own investigation. Furthermore, Cohen-Watnick is family friends with Frank Gaffney of DC, a known Islamaphobe and tied to Breitbart News. talkingpointsmemo.com/…

The Business Insider even notes that the Adam Shiff, the top Democrat on the House Intelligence Committee wonders whether the White House will distort information in the investigation. “Speaking on Capitol Hill Thursday, Schiff said he was "more than willing" to accept the White House offer to view new information. But he raised concerns that Trump officials may have used Nunes to "launder information to our committee to avoid the true source."

www.businessinsider.com/…

Adding to the Very Tangled Web, new information is coming out that Congressman Nunes has been a friend and supporter of Michael Flynn even when he had to leave the NSA in disgrace. www.theguardian.com/… Nunes, Flynn, and Cohen-Watnick all were advisers to the Trump campaign and/or transition team and have loyalty relationships to Trump going back a ways.

On top of this all, Michael Flynn, Jared Kushner, and Paul Manafort all volunteered to speak with the House Intelligence Committee, with the blessing of the President, while the President has tried to prevent Deputy Attorney General Sally Yates from talking with the same committee. Makes one suspicious, doesn’t it? Are Flynn, Kushner, and Manafort some kind of Trojan Horse that will screw up the independent investigation? and Sally Yates the one with the real goods on Trump duplicity?

According to one report, “Rep. Adam Schiff, D-Calif., responded to reports that retired Lt. Gen. Mike Flynn wants immunity to talk to the FBI and testify in front of the House and Senate intelligence committees by mentioning Yates' postponed testimony in front of the House panel.

"The public should learn a lot more about WHY General Flynn wants immunity when Sally Yates testifies before the House Intelligence Committee," Schiff tweeted. www.washingtonexaminer.com/...
