Bill Maher went to the core of what keeps a man-child in power even as Trump continues to screw up with everything he says or does, willing enablers.

Bill Maher came down hard on enablers in this excerpted video, who continue to be the lifeline for Donald Trump's lunacy and alternate state of reality. He made it clear that absent these folks there would not be a Donald Trump.

Bill Maher blames enablers for Donald Trump

"If you get up every day and try to make Donald Trump's ludicrous and dangerous pronouncements sound normal and sane, you are an enabler," Maher said. "Twenty years from now when your kid ask you over a glass of Soylent Green, 'What did you do during the Trump years, daddy?' You don't want your answer to be, 'My job was to go on TV and pretend Trump didn't say what everybody just heard him say.' That is an enabler. And that word is not a compliment."

Maher then pointed out several celebrities that had enablers. He gave Elvis Presley, Michael Jackson, and Bill Cosby as examples. He used fictional character Max, "the sycophantic man servant to the delusional former star, Norma Desmond," as the ultimate parallel to Trump's enablers. Maher showed the parallel of Norma Desmond descending the stairs and then Trump descending the escalator during his candidacy announcement. Max indulged Norma Desmond's Fantasy by among other things writing letters from nonexistent adoring fans.

"Is that any different than this guy [Devin Nunez] pretending to have intelligence that backs up what his mad boss tweeted at three in the morning? Maher asked. "Or the way Trump's handlers keep sending him to rallies where he only has to see the people who tell him he is doing great just like it says on his hat."

Maher scolded enablers for surrounding Trump after Trumpcare's defeat by allowing his delusion in blaming Congress for said defeat.

"Trump has nothing but Maxes around him," Maher said. "Did you know that Devin Nunez once defended Trump by saying, I thnk a lot of things he says, you guys sometimes take literally. Excuse me. We, shouldn' t take the President of the United States literally? Right he is a poet. When he nukes Finland, it is a metaphor."

Bill went on to point out that both Mike Pence and Jeff Sessions gave Trump cover immediately after PussyGate. He showed Reince Priebus and Sean Spicer lying for the President.

"Without these professional liars and deniers, there is no Trump. It takes a village to help a man-child stay in power. And the excuse, 'I am just doing my job' is starting to sound a whole lot like I was just following orders. Maher then showed a WWII clip.
