CLOSE Skip in Skip x Embed x Share Congressman Beto O'Rourke announced he will challenge Senator Ted Cruz for Senate in 2018 on Friday. Wochit

Buy Photo Congressman Beto O'Rourke announces his run for U.S. Senate on Friday, March 31, 2017. (Photo: Ruben R. Ramirez/El Paso Times)Buy Photo

El Paso Democratic Congressman Beto O’Rourke has officially launched what political experts call an uphill battle to unseat U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz in 2018.

After months of signaling an interest in the Senate seat, O’Rourke formally announced his campaign Friday morning during an event in El Paso. The announcement marks the culmination of a months-long tour across Texas that O'Rourke said helped cement his decision to seek statewide office.

“Everywhere I went, it really didn’t matter if it was traditionally thought of as a blue part of the state or a red part of the state, people want something better for their families and for this state,” O’Rourke told the El Paso Times ahead of his public announcement. “They want to get behind somebody who can deliver on that. I’ve just been very encouraged … by people from all over this state to run and take this on, this opportunity to do better for Texas.”

The announcement kicks off what will be a nearly two-year, high-profile fight in Republican-dominated Texas against one of the most prominent GOP senators in the country.

Cruz was elected to the Senate in 2013, and last year campaigned against Donald Trump for the Republican presidential nomination. Democrats hope his Senate seat will be vulnerable in the mid-term election year that will serve as a barometer of the electorate's feelings on the Trump administration.

Buy Photo Congressman Beto O'Rourke's mother Melissa O'Rourke hold a sign announcing her son's run for Senate. (Photo: Ruben R. Ramirez/El Paso Times)

But political observers said any potential weakness for Cruz may not be enough to boost O'Rourke to victory. Texas hasn’t elected a Democrat to statewide office for more than two decades — longer than any other state in the country.

O'Rourke, 44, is a former El Paso City Council member and a small business owner now in his third term in the U.S. House of Representatives. He preaches government accessibility and accountability and is known for his social media savvy. He has committed to not accepting money from political action committees and said he would self-impose a two-term limit if elected to the Senate.

O'Rourke said he recognizes the challenges ahead but believes Texas voters may sway Democrat for the right candidate, particularly one who is willing to work in a bipartisan manner.

“I don’t subscribe to the notion that it’s a red state or it’s going to become a blue state or it’s a purple state,” he said Friday after the rally in Downtown El Paso's Alcantar Sky Garden. “People don’t describe themselves in color.”

In his speech to supporters, he emphasized a need to better support troops deployed overseas, improve education, stop the war on drugs, make quality health care accessible and aid those struggling with opioid addiction. He said Texas has fallen from its former rank of being the top job creator in the country, leaving behind many in a state that should build on its diversity and creativity.

“But all these commitments and these opportunities … we’re not going to be able to fulfill them unless we have a senator who’s working full time for Texas, a senator who’s not using this position of responsibility and power to serve his own interests to run for president, to shut down the government,” O’Rourke said.

Representatives for Cruz, 46, didn’t return multiple requests for comment.

Buy Photo Campaign posters and images announcing Congressman Beto O'Rourke's run for Senate. (Photo: Ruben R. Ramirez/El Paso Times)

But a fundraising email from the Cruz campaign called O'Rourke an "unabashed liberal” on Friday. A Snapchat geofilter paid for by the Cruz campaign depicted O’Rourke as a puppet manipulated by House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi and Democratic Sen. Chuck Schumer.

Texas Gov. Greg Abbott also released a statement in support of Cruz, saying "voters overwhelmingly rejected Democrat policies in 2016, and I’m confident Texans will continue that streak in 2018.”

Long odds for victory

O'Rourke is the only competitor who has officially announced a bid to unseat Cruz. Democratic U.S. Rep. Joaquin Castro of San Antonio said he is weighing the possibility of a Senate run, and political analyst Matthew Dowd has floated an independent campaign for the seat.

Even if O'Rourke were to win the Democratic primary, his chances of reaching the office are slim, according to several political analysts interviewed by the El Paso Times.

Not only does Texas have more Republican voters than Democratic voters, but non-presidential election years, like 2018, also tend to see lower voter turnout among Democrats. Name recognition and fundraising will also be major hurdles for O’Rourke, a congressman little known outside of El Paso, experts said.

“For O’Rourke to have even a glimmer of hope in 2018 or 2020, the Trump presidency would have to literally implode, thereby adversely affecting Republicans on the ballot from coast to coast,” said Mark Jones, a political science professor at Rice University in Houston.

CLOSE Skip in Skip x Embed x Share U.S. Rep. Beto O'Rourke has announced his bid for U.S. Senate on Friday, March 31, 2017. Aaron Bracamontes/El Paso Times

O’Rourke would need to raise at least $20 million to run a viable race, Jones said. But drawing big national donors to the Texas campaign could be difficult, because many contributors will be focused on ensuring Senate Democrats up for re-election in red states are able to keep their seats next year, experts said.

Related: Why Beto O'Rourke should run for Senate: Editorial I O'Rourke named to veterans economic subcommittee I 700 rally to show support for Dreamers

Yet Democrats have hope. They point to Trump’s 38 percent approval rating and an outpouring of political activism in response to the new president, from the Women’s March to rallies against Trump’s executive orders on immigration.

“When you start seeing the stilts that the house are built on looking weak, it’s a time to take action,” said Austin-based Democratic political consultant James Aldrete. “You cannot not notice the changing currents.”

And some Democratic strategists argue O'Rourke's charisma could give him an edge. A recent Washington Post profile described the congressman as "a Gen Xer who speaks fluent Spanish and looks more like a Kennedy than the Kennedys do."

The tide may be turning in favor of a candidate like O'Rourke, said John Lapp, a Democratic strategist out of Washington, D.C., who has worked on congressional and gubernatorial campaigns.

“I think you have to throw out the old political map, the old political calculation and realize that people are hungering for somebody who’s authentic,” Lapp said. “That’s what makes this time different, this election different.”

Republican political consultant Ray Sullivan, who worked on the presidential campaigns of George W. Bush and Rick Perry, scoffed when asked if 2018 was the year Texas would vote blue.

“Every year since 1994 has been the year that Democrats were going to take back the state and win a statewide election, and it never happens,” Sullivan said. “And it’s not going to happen in 2018 either.”

Related:O'Rourke: Focus on broken House, not social media I O'Rourke addresses needs, concerns related to DACA I Advocates make pitch for Castner Range before Obama departs

Trump won Texas by a smaller margin than did Mitt Romney in 2012, and Democrats saw gains last year in historically conservative suburbs around Houston, Dallas and Austin. But Jim Henson, who heads the Texas Politics Project at the University of Texas at Austin, said believing in a statewide win for Democrats next year may be too optimistic.

Henson said any talk that Cruz’s gaffes during the presidential campaign make him a weakened candidate is folly. Polling numbers show the senator has the support of two-thirds of Texas Republicans, Henson said.

“His approval numbers are poor among Democrats, but that doesn’t matter very much,” he added.

An underdog again

Buy Photo Congressman Beto O'Rourke announces his run for U.S. Senate on Friday, March 31, 2017. (Photo: Ruben R. Ramirez/El Paso Times)

O’Rourke said it’s too soon to know how the Trump presidency will affect his Senate race. But he said Texans of both parties have expressed a desire for constraints on presidential power.

“We also need a senator who will provide a check and a balance and will fight, when necessary, against a president who’s focused on building walls or conducting military-style immigrant roundups or banning refugees from a country that was built by refugees,” O’Rourke said. “We need to meet this fear, this anxiety, this paranoia that’s coming out of the White House and is gripping so much of this country with a strength and a confidence that can only come from Texas.”

The El Paso Democrat is no stranger to being the underdog.

In 2012, O'Rourke ran against eight-term U.S. Rep. Silvestre Reyes in the Democratic Primary. Reyes had the backing of President Barack Obama and former President Bill Clinton. O’Rourke, who had the help of an anti-incumbent super PAC, squeaked by with 50.5 percent of the vote in the primary.

Related: 20 best moments from O'Rourke & Hurd's road trip I Castro visits El Paso, eyes run for Senate I Potenial Cruz foes to visit each others’ turf

“We’re a community that produces winners against long odds,” O'Rourke said. “I think that’s what we’re going to do here.”

He taps into that underdog sense when making his pitch for why Texans should vote for him. He talks about the importance of serving those who feel ignored by government — people struggling to find jobs, veterans who have lived with substandard health care and border communities — and of being accountable and accessible to constituents, not to corporate donors.

“I don’t want there to ever be a question of who it is I’m talking to, who it is I serve, who it is I’m writing legislation for,” O’Rourke said Friday.

He switched to Spanish toward the end of the event, speaking smoothly and clearly.

“We’ll focus on comprehensive immigration reform, on creating jobs for each Texan that wants to work, on reforming our system of government to have a Senate that can represent each person in our country, our state, our communities,” he said. “We can wait until 2020 to treat each person with dignity and respect, or we can start now, here, in this community, in this state.”

'Betting on people'

Buy Photo Congressman Beto O'Rourke announced his run for U.S. Senate on Friday, March 31, 2017. (Photo: Ruben R. Ramirez/El Paso Times)

Even if O’Rourke loses the race, experts said the campaign could propel him into the governorship, the another Senate seat or a presidential Cabinet position years down the road.

“If he’s able to do well with the playing field stacked against him, that could help catapult his political career nationally,” Jones said.

O’Rourke said he’s not focused on future political possibilities ahead, but on this campaign.

Amy O’Rourke said she and her husband floated a possible Senate campaign on election night as they watched Trump clinch the presidency. They talked about a world in which they want to raise their three children – Ulysses, 10; Molly, 8; and Henry, 6 – and whether they could afford to wait for someone else to step up in a more favorable year.

“We were trying to figure out what we could do to change the conversation in Texas, and this seemed like the obvious thing,” said Amy O’Rourke, who is president of the website consulting company Stanton Street that the congressman once owned.

Related: Bipartisan road trip gives us hope: Editorial I Political scramble possible as O’Rourke eyes Senate​ I O’Rourke, Hurd among year's top moments in Congress​

The couple understand it’s a long road to victory, she said.

Politicos may consider O’Rourke’s bid a success simply if he narrows the gap between Republican and Democratic votes, but O’Rourke said only a win will be a victory.

“There’s something special going on in Texas,” O’Rourke told reporters Friday, holding Molly’s hand throughout interviews. “People are ready for something better. They want someone who’s going to be honest, who’s going to be accountable and who reflects them in what he says and what he does. I think Ted Cruz is smart to take this seriously.”

He said it’ll be a race between people and corporate cash, adding, “I’m going to be the one betting on people.”

Lindsey Anderson may be reached at 915-546-6345; landerson@elpasotimes.com; @l_m_anderson on Twitter.

Read or Share this story: http://www.elpasotimes.com/story/news/politics/elections/2017/03/31/orourke-challenge-cruz-senate-2018/99754094/
