let's fill some more steps

Old school attitudes about women aren’t going anywhere in our culture. We just elected a President who bragged about grabbing pussy. We elected a VP who follows the Billy Graham Rule. As a nation, we took a woman who was one of the most, if not the most, qualified candidates who ever tried to lead our country and we ran her down with double standards and false equivalencies. We put a buffoon in the Oval, a crooked jackass who will likely be impeached, but not before he trashes our federal institutions and alliances around the globe.

We could have had a competent, brilliant woman but we went with the loud dick.

On a basic level this obvious and tragic error stems from the long and tightly held belief that women should be the moral center of the household, the primary parent and also do the majority of the cooking and cleaning and basically just be cute and mute. Or as President Obama said in his timeless essay on feminism, “we raise our girls to be demure and our boys to be assertive.”

I was troubled by this piece in the NYT: Do Millenial Men Want Stay at Home Wives?

In 1994, only 42 percent of high school seniors agreed that the best family was one where the man was the main income earner and the woman took care of the home. But in 2014, 58 percent of seniors said they preferred that arrangement. In 1994, fewer than 30 percent of high school seniors thought “the husband should make all the important decisions in the family.” By 2014, nearly 40 percent subscribed to that premise.

But why should I be surprised that 20 years passed by, while I went through HS, College and started a family and ideas about what women should do with their lives in the US hasn’t changed much or has gotten a little worse? Without women writing and debating and voting on more of the laws they live and work under nothing will change.

Tellingly, support for gender equality has continued to rise among all age groups in Europe, where substantial public investments in affordable, high-quality child care and paid leave for fathers and mothers are the norm. The availability of such options increasingly outweighs cultural support for traditional gender arrangements.

-Women are 50% of the population, but about 1 in 5 lawmakers are female.

-We’ve never had a female president or VP and many states have never had female governors.

-Women of color make up about 5% of state legislators across the country.

-Only About 50 women have ever served in the US Senate.

Why don’t women have more political power and representation? There are a million reasons. The most basic? We are too busy working, caring for loved ones of all ages and doing housework to run for office. Potential female candidates are 15 times more likely to be responsible for the majority of childcare. Women in the US do about 1.5 hours more of unpaid work on average/day than men do. Another big reason we don’t run is that we aren’t asked to. Men are identified in their communities, workplaces, schools as leaders and encouraged to become politicians. Women aren’t.

Also, we don’t have any sort of gender quota or target % for female candidacy like most political parties in democracies around the world.

There are currently twice as many male Democratic Senators and twice as many male Democratic House Reps as there are female. So even though we believe in gender equality on our side, even though we believe women should be in control of their own lives, workplaces and should be at the table when the major decisions of our time are made, we struggle to actually put women in power.

If we had 50/50 male/female Dem Senators for the last twenty years would we have paid family leave today? Cleaner air and water? Equal Pay? Justice for sexual assault victims? If we look at the countries that have higher rates of female representation, we see they have better policies for women and families in place, so it seems likely.

The women leading the Resistance have the potential to change this course. Democrats need to support the thousands of women across the country who are stepping up to run for office and bring them into the fold. Appalled by the actions of the Trump administration, we have marched and rallied and and are now starting to change the City Councils and School Boards in our local communities.

As Democrats, we have to start thinking about what women need when they run for office. As an example, one of the moms I know from my neighborhood is running for School Board. Our county Dems are phone banking for her this weekend. Further, we need to recruit women to serve in our local parties and state party leadership. And not just putting out the cookies at monthly meetings. We need their ideas, their experience and their talents to solve the problems men have created over the last 200 years. From online harassment to family responsibilities we need to think about how to streamline our party machinery to get women into our state houses and to DC. Women on the campaign trail, especially for local offices, don’t have the luxury of going to every Rotary luncheon or networking at the golf course. We are too busy packing lunches, taking our pets to the vet and cleaning out the fridge at the office.

We cannot sit by and let this wave of politically active women wash over us without engaging them.
