Grover Cleveland in 1895 was the last Democratic President to have a Supreme Court nominee confirmed by a Republican Senate

With it looking likely (and appropriate) that Democrats will filibuster the Supreme Court nomination of Neil Gorsuch, a number of Democratic Senators (and pundits) are expressing unease at no-doubt triggering the “nuclear option” whereby Republicans eliminate all Supreme Court filibusters going forward. Senator Joe Manchin III of West Virginia and Senator Heidi Heitkamp of North Dakota have said they will vote for Gorsuch, and as of two days ago at least these 16 Democratic Senators (click within) are still undecided about filibustering Gorsuch.

The concerns of this squeamish, preserve-the-filibuster crowd are entirely misconceived — so much so that they are working only to do lasting damage to Democratic interests.

Initially — and this is not the reason for this post — the filibuster is already dead. We all know this . As the nervous-nellies concede (it is the premise of their argument), Republicans will eliminate the filibuster the moment it is invoked. And, if Democrats are honest, we would nuke the filibuster too if the tables were reversed and Republicans tried it. Today, the filibuster is a ceremonial relic. It is a mythological weapon from the distant past, like King Arthur’s sword. It is dead already.

But more importantly, the unsteady Democratic Senators completely misapprehend the landscape. Today, 51 votes is the true threshold — and the Merrick Garland non-nomination showed us that Republicans no longer have the ability to provide any votes to reach 51 votes, much more 60 votes. The reason McConnell refused to bring Garland to a hearing and a vote was not because he was afraid the Republican Senate would confirm him, but because he knew it would expose the fact that no Republican Senators are willing anymore to vote for a Democratic nominee. None. It has become a crippling litmus test, like voting for Planned Parenthood or a tax increase.

Consider this: the Republican party has no institutional history of confirming Democratic nominees. The last time a Republican Senate confirmed a Democratic nominee was under Grover Cleveland in 1895 — yes, over 121 years ago. And, today, the modern, radical Republican party is beyond hard-pressed to find any Republican votes to confirm a Democratic nominee. President Obama’s last confirmed Justice — Elena Kagan — received only five unneeded Republican votes — and of that group, only two — Senators Graham and Collins — remain in the Senate. By the time of the Garland nomination, Republicans had — at most — those two uncertain votes to offer, which still would have left the 46 Democratic Senators three votes shy of 51 votes (or 50 with a VP vote) to confirm anyone.

To make this simple : 51 votes is the new filibuster. Democrats only have two choices: (i) confirm their nominees themselves, or (ii) scrape hard at the bottom of the Republican barrel to somehow come up with the 3 to 6 needed Republican votes. If today’s nervous Democratic Senators cling to a 60 vote threshold instead, then Democrats will rarely, if ever, be able to confirm a Supreme Court justice.

So — for the sake of the next Democratic nominee — please God, filibuster Neil Gorsuch.

[ Note — I have not argued here that the filibuster of Gorsuch is required morally, politically and as a matter of sheer self-respect. It is . My point is a little different. Under any circumstances, Dems need to get rid of the filibuster and begin facing their true 51 vote test.]

* * * * *
