Image copyright Reuters/BBC Image caption Take That's album was the highest new entry - but it couldn't beat Sheeran

Ed Sheeran has denied Take That their eighth UK number one album, as he holds on to the top spot for a fourth week with Divide.

Wonderland - the second album since Take That became a trio - had to settle for second place and the highest new entry, with 113,000 sales.

James Blunt has scored his fifth top 10 album, as The Afterlove debuts at six.

Sheeran's Shape of You isn't losing its form in the singles chart, staying at number one for the 12th straight week.

He is also at number two with Galway Girl and number five with Castle on the Hill - both from Divide, the Official Charts Company said.

Top five albums Artist Title 1) Ed Sheeran Divide 2) Take That Wonderland 3) Drake More Life 4) Rag 'N' Bone Man Human 5) 100 Vera Lynn

Source: Official Charts Company

It's the first time Take That have failed to reach number one with an album in its first week since before they reformed without Robbie Williams.

But they can take some solace from the fact that their 2005 retrospective of '90s hits, Never Forget: The Ultimate Collection, has gone up to 25 in the album chart.

Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Take That now perform as a three-piece

There seems to be no stopping Divide's success, and Shape of You has now beaten milestones set by Rihanna and Whitney Houston.

When it claimed the number one single spot last week, the song overtook Rihanna's 2007 chart-topper Umbrella and Houston's 1992 version of I Will Always Love You, which both topped the charts for 10 consecutive weeks.

Top five singles Artist Title 1) Ed Sheeran Shape of You 2) Ed Sheeran Galway Girl 3) Drake Passionfruit 4) Clean Bandit ft Zara Larsson Symphony 5) Ed Sheeran Castle on the Hill

Source: Official Charts Company

Drake is at number three in the singles chart with Passionfruit, while Clean Bandit's song with Zara Larsson, Symphony, is in fourth place.

In the album chart, Drake's More Life slips from two to three; Rag 'N' Bone Man stays at four with his debut album Human; and Dame Vera Lynn's 100 falls two places to five.

Follow us on Facebook, on Twitter @BBCNewsEnts, or on Instagram at bbcnewsents. If you have a story suggestion email entertainment.news@bbc.co.uk.
