Another busy week in the entertainment world has ended, including Cheryl and Liam becoming proud parents, Gary Barlow bagging a Star Wars role, Professor Brian Cox landing in Postman Pat's Greendale and the Cannes Film Festival kicking off a row about airbrushing.

Here's a round-up of some things you might have missed:

Image copyright CBeebies Image caption Professor Brian Cox got to hang out with Postman Pat when he became a space expert character on the CBeebies cartoon show.

Image copyright Instagram Image caption One Direction's Liam Payne and former X Factor judge Cheryl announced the arrival of a "beautiful, healthy baby boy".

Image copyright PA/Lucasfilm Image caption Take That star Gary Barlow revealed his latest venture: A part in the next Star Wars movie.

Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Actress Emma Thompson condemned the pressure on actresses to be thin and how it stopped her moving to LA.

Image copyright Helen Maybanks Image caption David Tennant told us how his latest play, Don Juan, is being constantly tweaked to feature topical jokes.

Image copyright Carole Bellaiche Image caption Singer and actress Jane Birkin admitted she now rarely uses the famous handbag that bears her name.

Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Accountancy firm PricewaterhouseCoopers will continue to manage the ballots at the Oscars - but there is to be no more tweeting backstage.

Image copyright Steve Ullathorne/BBC Image caption Sue Perkins said she was "beyond chuffed" to be hosting the Bafta TV Awards next month in Graham Norton's Eurovision-enforced absence.

Image copyright Reuters Image caption A private funeral for George Michael took place at London's Highgate Cemetery, three months on from his sudden death on Christmas Day.

Image copyright Bronx/Archivio Cameraphoto Epoche/Getty Image caption And the Cannes Film Festival caused beaucoup outrage by airbrushing the photo of Italian actress Claudia Cardinale that appears on this year's poster.

Follow us on Facebook, on Twitter @BBCNewsEnts, or on Instagram at bbcnewsents. If you have a story suggestion email entertainment.news@bbc.co.uk.
