NEW YORK – JANUARY 23, 2017— FOX News Channel (FNC) has signed former State Department deputy spokesperson and Democratic advisor Marie Harf as a contributor. In this role, she will offer national security and political analysis across FNC and FOX Business Network’s (FBN) daytime and primetime programming. Harf will make her FNC debut on The First 100 Days (7-8 PM/ET) with Martha MacCallum this evening.

Most recently, Harf served as the senior advisor for strategic communications to Secretary of State John Kerry. She previously held the position of deputy spokesperson for the State Department from July 2013 until May 2015, where she served as the department’s acting spokesperson from March 27, 2015 until May 13 of that year.

Prior to joining the State Department, Harf was the senior advisor and media spokesperson for former Sen. Chuck Hagel (R-NE) as he was being confirmed to be Secretary of Defense. Previously, during the 2012 presidential election, she worked on all national security and foreign policy issues for President Barack Obama’s re-election campaign in addition to serving as the campaign’s press spokesperson on national security issues. She was also a member of President Obama’s debate preparation team.

Harf began her federal government career as an analyst on Middle East leadership issues in the CIA’s Directorate of Intelligence. She received a Master’s degree in foreign affairs from the University of Virginia and received a Bachelor of Arts degree in political science with concentrations in Jewish Studies and Russian & Eastern European Studies from Indiana University.

FOX News Channel (FNC) is a 24-hour all-encompassing news service dedicated to delivering breaking news as well as political and business news. The number one network in cable, FNC has been the most watched television news channel for nearly 15 years and according to a Suffolk University/USA Today poll, is the most trusted television news source in the country. Owned by 21st Century Fox, FNC is available in more than 90 million homes and dominates the cable news landscape, routinely notching the top ten programs in the genre.

###

FOX News Media Contact:

Jessica Jensen/212.301.3531
