Executive Produced and Hosted by TMZ’s Harvey Levin

NEW YORK – February 21, 2017— FOX News Channel (FNC) has acquired a ten-episode series order of OBJECTified, announced Sharri Berg, Senior Vice President of News Operations for FOX News and COO of FOX Television Stations.

Hosted by TMZ’s Harvey Levin, the series will feature intimate interviews with high profile newsmakers and celebrities, telling their life stories through the objects they’ve chose to keep over the years. The objects become jumping off points in understanding how the experiences of the person shaped them into who they are today.

Debuting in the fall of 2017 in primetime on Sundays, the series will present close-up interviews with high profile newsmakers and celebrities, aiming to tell the stories of their lives through their own personal items.

In making the announcement, Berg said “The OBJECTified special presented on FNC last fall exceeded our expectations, so we’re thrilled to continue working with Harvey Levin and his talented team of producers on this new series.”

The series order follows the successful FNC special OBJECTified: Donald Trump, featuring then-presidential candidate Donald Trump. According to Nielsen Media Research, OBJECTified averaged over 4 million total viewers and nearly one million in the 25-54 demographic, beating CNN and MSNBC combined for the hour. Additionally, the program delivered a yearly Friday night high for the network.

Levin added, “What I love about the show is that it’s a different way of telling a life story, and it’s relatable to anyone who watches. Everyone keeps stuff that means something to them, and when you start probing what the objects mean to you, what was going on in your life at the time, they can unlock the story of who you are today.”

The OBJECTified series will be produced by Harvey Levin Productions, Inc. in association with Telepictures and distributed by Warner Bros. Domestic Television Distribution. Harvey Levin and Ryan Regan will serve as the program’s executive producers alongside John Finley, FNC’s Vice President of Development.

FOX News Channel (FNC) is a 24-hour all-encompassing news service dedicated to delivering breaking news as well as political and business news. The number one network in cable, FNC has been the most watched television news channel for 15 years and according to a Suffolk University/USA Today poll, is the most trusted television news source in the country. Owned by 21st Century Fox, FNC is available in more than 90 million homes and dominates the cable news landscape, routinely notching the top ten programs in the genre.

###

FOX News Media Contact

Carly Shanahan/212.301.3851
