NEW YORK – February 27, 2017 — FOX News announced today that Paul Rittenberg, its Executive Vice President of Advertising Sales, is stepping down from his position effective April 28th. Mr. Rittenberg has led all television and digital ad sales efforts for FOX News Channel (FNC) and FOX Business Network (FBN) since their inception.

In making the announcement, Co-Presidents Jack Abernethy and Bill Shine jointly said, “Throughout his 20 plus years at FOX News, Paul has developed powerful relationships with clients and built one of the most respected and successful teams in the industry. Coming off our most profitable year yet, we are tremendously grateful to him for his many contributions in making both FOX News Channel and FOX Business Network the most coveted marketing platforms in cable.”

Rittenberg added, “It has been one of my greatest honors to help build the FOX News brand from the ground up into the most successful and recognizable names in the industry. I am so proud of what we were able to accomplish and am grateful for the opportunity to work with such a talented team.”

Joining FOX News in April 1996 as Vice President of Advertising Sales, Rittenberg was one of the network’s first employees, six months before its launch. During his more than two-decade tenure, he was responsible for helping the network achieve operational break-even by doubling advertising sales every year. In 2007, he took on the additional role as head of sales for FBN, and led the network to operational break-even ahead of schedule. 2016 marked FNC and FBN’s most profitable years in each network’s history, breaking records across both the television and digital space.

Prior to FNC, Rittenberg served as Vice President of Advertising Sales at CNBC where his department more than doubled sales in 1995. For seven years, Rittenberg held several management and sales positions within ABC and began his career as a media buyer working for Irwin Gotlieb at Benton & Bowles. He is also a longtime member of the Video Advertising Bureau’s board of directors.

About FOX News

FOX News Channel (FNC) is a 24-hour all-encompassing news service dedicated to delivering breaking news as well as political and business news. A top five cable network, FNC has been the most-watched news channel in the country for 15 years and according to a Suffolk University/USA Today poll, is the most trusted television news source in the country. Owned by 21st Century Fox, FNC is available in more than 90 million homes and dominates the cable news landscape, routinely notching the top ten programs in the genre.

###

FOX News Media Contact: Irena Briganti/212-301-3608
