The week in pictures

Here are the most arresting images taken in the past seven days

Boy holds an orange to feed the Owl butterflies at the Natural History Museum in London. (AP) boy-holds-an-orange-to-feed-the-owl-butterflies-at-the-natural-history-museum-in-london.

Police officers detain an opposition supporter during a rally in Vladivostok, Russia. (Reuters) police-officers-detain-an-opposition-supporter-during-a-rally-in-vladivostok,-russia.

Vanessa James of France falls down while competing in the ISU World Figure Skating Championships. (Reuters) vanessa-james-of-france-falls-down-while-competing-in-the-isu-world-figure-skating-championships.

A dinosaur statue stands outside a store off the highway in Terlingua, Texas, near the US-Mexico border. (AP) a-dinosaur-statue-stands-outside-a-store-off-the-highway-in-terlingua,-texas,-near-the-us-mexico-border.

A close up shows the detail inside a tulip flower in the first Italian tulip field, planted by a Dutch couple in Cornaredo, near Milan, Italy. (AP) a-close-up-shows-the-detail-inside-a-tulip-flower-in-the-first-italian-tulip-field,-planted-by-a-dutch-couple-in-cornaredo,-near-milan,-italy.

Tourists pose for a souvenir photo on Trocadero with the Eiffel Tower in background on a sunny day in Paris. (AP) tourists-pose-for-a-souvenir-photo-on-trocadero-with-the-eiffel-tower-in-background-on-a-sunny-day-in-paris.

Brides-to-be participate in the "Running of the Brides" race in a park in Bangkok, Thailand. (Reuters) brides-to-be-participate-in-the-"running-of-the-brides"-race-in-a-park-in-bangkok,-thailand.

People take part in the Mud Day race, an eight-mile obstacle course in Tel Aviv, Israel. (AP) people-take-part-in-the-mud-day-race,-an-eight-mile-obstacle-course-in-tel-aviv,-israel.

The sunken ferry Sewol on a semi-submersible transport vessel during a salvage operation in waters off Jindo, South Korea. (AP) the-sunken-ferry-sewol-on-a-semi-submersible-transport-vessel-during-a-salvage-operation-in-waters-off-jindo,-south-korea.

Malaysian tiger cubs play with resident nursery dog Blakely at the Cincinnati Zoo & Botanical Gardens. (AP) malaysian-tiger-cubs-play-with-resident-nursery-dog-blakely-at-the-cincinnati-zoo-&-botanical-gardens.

A Filipino boy runs on the seawall along the Manila Bay as the sun sets in Manila, Philippines. (AP) a-filipino-boy-runs-on-the-seawall-along-the-manila-bay-as-the-sun-sets-in-manila,-philippines.

A toddler enjoys blooming cherry blossoms in Tokyo. (AP) a-toddler-enjoys-blooming-cherry-blossoms-in-tokyo.

Derrick Campana kneels beside a three legged mini horse who wears a prosthetic leg in Sterling, Virginia. (Reuters) derrick-campana-kneels-beside-a-three-legged-mini-horse-who-wears-a-prosthetic-leg-in-sterling,-virginia.

Federal policemen fire toward Islamic State positions in the old city during fighting on the western side of Mosul. (AP) federal-policemen-fire-toward-islamic-state-positions-in-the-old-city-during-fighting-on-the-western-side-of-mosul.

Snipers of the Iraqi federal police take their positions during clashes with Islamic State militants, in Mosul. (Reuters) snipers-of-the-iraqi-federal-police-take-their-positions-during-clashes-with-islamic-state-militants,-in-mosul.

Killer whales prey on a young sea lions, left, in Punta Norte, Argentina.The predatory ritual occurs annually here in March and April. (AP) killer-whales-prey-on-a-young-sea-lions,-left,-in-punta-norte,-argentina.the-predatory-ritual-occurs-annually-here-in-march-and-april.

Nepalese devotees participate in the Panch Areh chariot festival in Kathmandu, Nepal. (AP) nepalese-devotees-participate-in-the-panch-areh-chariot-festival-in-kathmandu,-nepal.

A dust storm sweeps through a makeshift camps in Baidoa, west of Somalia's capital Mogadishu. (Reuters) a-dust-storm-sweeps-through-a-makeshift-camps-in-baidoa,-west-of-somalia's-capital-mogadishu.

Russian President, Vladimir Putin, inspects a crevasse in a glacier on the Arctic Franz Josef Land archipelago in Arctic Russia. (AP) russian-president,-vladimir-putin,-inspects-a-crevasse-in-a-glacier-on-the-arctic-franz-josef-land-archipelago-in-arctic-russia.

Margaret McCall, a clean energy consultant from Chicago, at Santa Elena Canyon in the Rio Grande river. (AP) margaret-mccall,-a-clean-energy-consultant-from-chicago,-at-santa-elena-canyon-in-the-rio-grande-river.

Authorities investigate after a deadly crash involving a van carrying church members and a pickup truck on U.S. 83 in Uvalde County, Texas. (Pete Luna/The San Antonio Express-News via AP) authorities-investigate-after-a-deadly-crash-involving-a-van-carrying-church-members-and-a-pickup-truck-on-u.s.-83-in-uvalde-county,-texas.

Coal-mining communities across Appalachia see a shot at rebuilding, as the Trump administration moves to ease regulations (FOX News) coal-mining-communities-across-appalachia-see-a-shot-at-rebuilding,-as-the-trump-administration-moves-to-ease-regulations
