Tarek and Christina El Moussa have maintained they have remained on good terms since announcing their split this summer.

However, it seems a battle of the revenge bods is brewing between the exes. The "Flip or Flop" stars have been busy flooding their various social media channels with pictures of themselves showing off their newly-toned bods.

Christina made the first move by sharing pictures from a photo shoot she did for L*Space by Monica Wise bikini. She posed in matching purple bikinis with the pair's 6-year-old daughter Taylor.

A post shared by Christina El Moussa (@christinaelmoussa) on Mar 23, 2017 at 12:01pm PDT

She told People she enjoys running and yoga to help clear her head since the split.

CHRISTINA EL MOUSSA SLAMMED FOR BIKINI PIC

“There is nothing like a good three-mile run for me to really clear my head," she shared. "My other go-to is yoga. I have the most amazing private instructor who has changed my life. Our sessions are very spiritual and have really helped me cope with my divorce and other emotions I’m going through during this time."

Tarek has also been hitting the gym now that he's single. He shared a snap of himself showing off his buff arms in Costa Rica.

A post shared by Tarek El Moussa (@therealtarekelmoussa) on Mar 26, 2017 at 6:03pm PDT

Christina hit back with several sexy pics from a recent photo shoot.

A post shared by Christina El Moussa (@christinaelmoussa) on Mar 25, 2017 at 4:24pm PDT

A post shared by Christina El Moussa (@christinaelmoussa) on Mar 30, 2017 at 9:42am PDT

As of now, Tarek has had the last word sharing a picture of himself shirtless at the gym.

'REHAB ADDICT'S NICOLE CURTIS: I WAS 'THREATENED AND HARASSED'



"I shot this and was too embarrassed to share so I didn't... I know my journey has inspired many people so I made the difficult decision to post.. this is after battling 2 cancers and a debilitating back injury. My doctor said "You would probably never be able to lift weights again"... that motivated me to prove him wrong and get into the best shape of my life!" he wrote.

A post shared by Tarek El Moussa (@therealtarekelmoussa) on Mar 30, 2017 at 12:12pm PDT

FOLLOW US ON FACEBOOK FOR MORE FOX ENTERTAINMENT NEWS
