Co-Anchors Bret Baier and Martha MacCallum to Provide Special LIVE Coverage From 9PM/ET – 11PM/ET

Shepard Smith to Anchor Coverage for FOX Broadcasting

Fox News Channel (FNC) will present special coverage leading up to and following President Trump’s Address to the Joint Session of Congress, and the Democratic Response on Tuesday, February 28th. Telecast live from Washington D.C., Special Report’s Bret Baier and The First 100 Days’ Martha MacCallum will anchor primetime programming beginning at 9PM/ET, with contributions from FNC’s Tucker Carlson, co-hosts of The Five Dana Perino and Juan Williams, senior political analyst Brit Hume and FOX News Sunday’s Chris Wallace. Additionally, Hannity will present a live hour of analysis at 11PM/ET.

On FOX Broadcasting Company, FNC’s Shepard Smith will anchor separate live coverage from Washington D.C. beginning at 9PM/ET. Contributions will be provided by FNC correspondent Rich Edson, in addition to others.

FNC’s special live programming will include:

6-9AM/ET – FOX & Friends (live from Washington D.C.)

9-11AM/ET – America’s Newsroom co-anchored by Bill Hemmer and Shannon Bream (live from Washington D.C.)

11-12PM/ET – Happening Now (live from New York)

2-1PM/ET – Outnumbered (live from New York)

1-2PM/ET – Happening Now (live from New York)

2-3PM/ET – America’s News Headquarters anchored by Bill Hemmer (live from Washington D.C.)

3-4PM/ET – Shepard Smith Reporting (live from Washington D.C.)

4-5PM/ET – Your World with Neil Cavuto (live from Washington D.C.)

5-6PM/ET – The Five (Co-hosts Dana Perino and Juan Williams will be live from Washington D.C.)

7-8PM/ET – The First 100 Days anchored by Martha MacCallum (live from Washington D.C.)

8-9PM/ET – The O’Reilly Factor (live from New York)

9-11PM/ET – President Trump’s Address to the Joint Session of Congress and post-address analysis co-anchored by Bret Baier and Martha MacCallum (live from Washington D.C.)

11PM-12AM/ET – Hannity (live from Washington D.C.)



FOXNews.com and the FOX News app will be available to live stream the President’s Address to the Joint Session of Congress. Viewers can access this on their desktop or mobile device, while following a live blog as Fox News covers the event in real-time. Additionally, social media users can follow the Fox News Channel Facebook page, or on Twitter at @FOXNews.

Fox News Radio (FNR) will offer two hours of live coverage co-anchored by FNR’s Jared Halpern and Jon Decker, who will report live from inside the House Chamber. Coverage will include the Democratic Response, as well as detailed analysis and contributions from former Deputy Assistant to President George W. Bush, Brad Blakeman, Professor Alan Saxe, former Senior Advisor to Secretary John Kerry, Mary Anne Marsh, members of Congress, in addition to others. Fox News Headlines 24/7 will also report live on SiriusXM Channel 115.

FOX News Channel (FNC) is a 24-hour all-encompassing news service dedicated to delivering breaking news as well as political and business news. The number one network in cable, FNC has been the most-watched television news channel for 15 years and according to a Suffolk University/USA Today poll, is the most trusted television news source in the country. Owned by 21st Century Fox, FNC is available in 90 million homes and dominates the cable news landscape, routinely notching the top ten programs in the genre.

###
