FOX News Channel (FNC) will debut a one-hour political talk show entitled, The Next Revolution with Steve Hilton this May, announced Suzanne Scott, Executive Vice President of Programming. Hosted by FNC contributor Steve Hilton, The Next Revolution will become a regular part of FNC’s weekend lineup, airing weekly on Sundays at 9PM/ET.

Originating from FNC’s Los Angeles studios, The Next Revolution with Steve Hilton will primarily focus on the populist movement and its impact throughout America and the world. The episodes will take an in-depth look at global news and feature a rotating panel of political experts who will discuss and debate the most prominent stories of the week. Additionally, Hilton will feature interviews with major newsmakers and high-profile guests.

In making the announcement, Scott said, “Steve’s unique expertise and background has been an asset to our programming and we are excited to welcome his fresh global perspective to our weekend lineup.”

Hilton added, “I’m incredibly excited about this opportunity to expand my role at FOX News Channel and am so looking forward to offering our viewers a fresh outlook on the big issues and ideas in politics, government and technology that will be shaping the future, here in America and around the world. It’s been a huge pleasure to become part of the FOX News family, working with an amazing group of warm, professional, talented people, and I’m so proud to be representing the Fox team from the West Coast.”

Hilton joined FNC as a contributor in 2016 and offers his political and tech expertise and analysis across FNC and FOX Business Network’s (FBN) daytime and primetime programs. He co-founded Crowdpac, an independent and non-partisan Silicon Valley political crowdfunding start-up, to help citizens engage in politics and running for office.

He also taught at Stanford University’s Institute of Design (d.school) and is the author of the UK Sunday Times bestseller “More Human: Designing a World Where People Come First.” Hilton previously served as senior advisor to former United Kingdom Prime Minister David Cameron and, prior to the 2010 general election, was Prime Minister Cameron’s head of strategy. Before his work in politics, Hilton co-founded Good Business, a consulting firm, and the award-winning London Restaurant, The Good Cook.

FOX News Channel (FNC) is a 24-hour all-encompassing news service dedicated to delivering breaking news as well as political and business news. The number one network in cable, FNC has been the most watched television news channel for 15 years and according to a Suffolk University/USA Today poll, is the most trusted television news source in the country. Owned by 21st Century Fox, FNC is available in 90 million homes and dominates the cable news landscape, routinely notching the top ten programs in the genre.

###

FOX News Media Contact :

Jaclyn Giuliano/212.301.3436
